================================================================================
ORIGINAL TEXT EXTRACTED FROM: upload_1756637087235_Allahbad_High_Court  (1).pdf
================================================================================
Text Length: 213535 characters
Extraction Timestamp: 2025-08-31T16:15:22.481037
================================================================================

In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22
January, 2025
Bench: Sangeeta Chandra, Pankaj Bhatia
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Reserved on 21.08.2024
Delivered on 22.01.2025
Neutral Citation No.- 2025:AHC-LKO:3665-FB
A.F.R.
Court No.9
Case :- CRIMINAL REFERENCE No. - 1 of 2024 
Applicant :- In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In Hearing Of Criminal Appeals 
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. 
Counsel for Applicant :- Suo Motu, Apoorva Tewari,Ayush Tandon,Alok Mishra,Nadeem Murtaz
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A. 
Hon'ble Mrs. Sangeeta Chandra, J. 
Hon'ble Pankaj Bhatia, J.
Hon'ble Mohd. Faiz Alam Khan,J.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
1

1. We have heard Shri Apoorva Tiwari, Shri Nadeem Murtaza, assisted by S/Shri Wali Nawaz Khan,
Harsh Vardhan Kedia and Ms. Smigdha Singh, Shri S.M. Singh Royekwar, assisted by Shri Sumeet
Tahilramani, Sri Vikas Vikram Singh, Sri Naved Ali, Sri Rajat Gangwar, Sri Alok Mishra, assisted by
Shri Ajeet Kumar Mishra, Sri Ayush Tandon, learned Advocates, as also Dr. V.K. Singh, learned
Government Advocate, Sri Umesh Chandra Verma, learned Additional Government Advocate-I, Shri
Pawan Kumar Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate, Sri Shivendra Shivam Singh
Rathore, learned counsel for the State, Shri Bhavesh Chandel and Shri Shivang Tiwari, learned
counsel at length.
2. This Reference has arisen out of order dated 12.03.2024 passed in Criminal Appeal No.465 of
1999: Surendra Prasad Misra and another Vs. State of U.P. and others, wherein a Division Bench
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Bench at Lucknow') while hearing the Appeal was apprised of two
orders of Coordinate Bench (hereinafter referred to as 'the Bench at Allahabad'), dated 18.01.2024
passed in Govt Appeal No.454 of 2022: State of U.P. Vs. Geeta Devi and another; and the order
dated 19.01.2024 passed in Govt Appeal No.2552 of 1981: State of U.P. Vs. Shamsuddin Khan and
others.
3. The order dated 18.01.2024 passed by the Division Bench at Allahabad in Government Appeal No.
454 of 2022 is being reproduced as under:-
"1. Heard learned AGA appearing for the State and learned counsel for the
respondents.
2. The present Government Appeal has been filed by the State against the order of
acquittal dated 7.6.2018 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge / FTC No. 3,
Muzaffar Nagar in ST No. 299 of 2007, under Sections 302, 201, 364, 120B IPC
(State Vs. Brajpal and others).
3. We have gone through the order dated 9.9.2022 of this Court which was passed on
the appeal filed by the State against the judgment of acquittal dated 7.6.2018. By the
order dated 9.9.2022, the respondents were directed to furnish personal bond with
two sureties in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned CJM. However, it
appears that they could not be served and thereafter Non bailable warrants were
issued and they were arrested.
4. Learned counsel submits that both the respondents are in custody since 27.11.2022
i.e for a period of one year and three months.
5. Though the Bench is not in agreement with the procedure followed by the Court
that in a State appeal challenging the judgment of acquittal, the issuance of Non
Bailable Warrants would interpretate that police authority will execute the same and
produce the concerned person before the High Court so that some effective order be
passed with regard to their bail. However, in the instant case despite acquittal, the
respondents are in judicial custody for more than one year and three months because
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
2

bailable warrants were not executed. It is worth noticing to reproduce Section 390 of
Cr.P.C. which read a under :
"Section 390: Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal:- When an appeal is
presented under section 378, the High Court may issue a warrant directing that the
accused be arrested and brought before it or any subordinate Court, and the Court
before which he is brought may commit him to prison pending the disposal of the
appeal or admit him to bail."
6. Similarity, in order to procure the presence of accused persons, the Court has an alternative
option to order for attachment of property of person absconding under Section 83 Cr.P.C.. Further,
Section 80 of Cr.P.C. provides for arrest of person against whom warrant is issued and it provides
for taking security under Section 71 of Cr.P.C for production before the Court, such person may be
released under Section 81 Cr.P.C.
7. A perusal of Section 390 Cr.P.C. clearly gives power to the Court before whom a accused is
brought, either to send him to prison or admit him to bail. It is also worth noticing that repeatedly
such type of cases are coming where in appeal in pursuance of the Non Bailable Warrant issued by
the High Court to the accused who were acquitted from the trial court re languishing in jail for more
than one year because they were either not served with the warrant or could not engage Advocate in
the High Court. It is held by a full Bench of Bombay High Court while interpretating provisions of
Section 390 Cr.P.C. that the very purpose of this Section is to ensure presence of an accused before
the Court. In view of the above, we deem it appropriate to issue a direction to the Director, Judicial
Training and Research Institute, Lucknow to take online seminar of all the Chief Judicial
Magistrates as well as Secretary, District Legal Services Authority and inform that :
(a) As and when Non Bailable Warrants are issued in appeal from acquittal and
accused is brought before the CJM / Ilaka Magistrate, he will be admitted bail subject
to furnishing bail bonds to their satisfaction and on undertaking that they will appear
before the High Court on particular date as per the order of the Court.
(b) Even in cases where appeal against conviction is pending before the High Court
and sentence is suspended and either he or his counsel could not appear before the
High Court and Non Bailable Warrants are issued on and produced before the CJM,
they will be released on bail to the satisfaction of the court concerned with an
undertaking that they will appear before the High Court.
(c) The Director of the Judicial Training and Research Institute, Lucknow will
conduct a survey in the State of U.P. to find out where in terms of issuance of Non
Bailable Warrant either in case of bail against acquittal or in case where accused
sentence is suspended, but subsequently he failed to appear, is in jail (prison) for
considerable long time, they will be released on bail in same terms as mentioned in
above sub para (a) and (b).
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
3

(d) Since keeping a person in judicial custody for long time without any justification
violate the right of life and liberty of such person, after 30 days of this order, if still
bails are not granted, this Court will impose cost of Rs. 50,000/- to be paid by the
District State Legal Services Authority concerned.
8. Be whatsoever, the Court deem it appropriate to release the respondents on bail.
9. Let the respondents namely Gita Devi and Afzal be released on bail subject to the satisfaction of
the court concerned.
10. Registrar General of this Court is directed to communicate this order to the Director, Judicial
Training and Research Institute, Lucknow within a week from today and submit compliance report
on the next date fixed.
Order on Appeal List the matter 30.01.2024. "
4. The observations made by the same Bench at Allahabad in its order dated
19.01.2024 passed in Government Appeal No. 2552 of 1981 are also reproduced as
under:-
"1. This Government Appeal was filed in the year 1981 challenging the judgment of
acquittal passed in favour of the opposite parties.
2. As per earlier order dated 14.12.2022, non bailable warrants were issued against
the accused-respondent no.1 and the Chief Judicial Magistrate concerned was
directed to sent a compliance report.
3. An office report dated 20.01.2023 was later on submitted stating therein that the
sureties of opposite party/respondent no.1 Shamshuddin are Bashir, who died on
08.04.2016 and Ram Kripal, who is about 70 years old and cannot walk, whereas all
sureties of respondent nos. 2 and 5 have died.
4. Thereafter again non-bailable warrants were issued against opposite party nos. 1
and 4 and the matter remains pending for considerable long time.
5. Learned counsel for respondent no.1, namely Shamshuddin Khan submits that he
is in jail and presently detained in District Jail, Banda. Even thereafter the case was
listed on number of occasions but it has been noticed in the order dated 10.04.2023
that respondent no.1 namely Shamshuddin Khan is not traceable though he is already
lodged in District Jail, Banda. The opposite party no.1 is in the judicial custody since
23.02.2023.
6. Learned A.G.A. could not dispute the above contention.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
4

7. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, issuance of
non-bailable-warrants to procure the presence of respondent no.1 so that he may
engage a counsel and defend his case through the counsel, has no relevance. We
deem it appropriate to grant bail to the accused-respondent no.1 namely
Shamshuddin Khan.
8. Let opposite party no.1- Shamshuddin Khan be released on bail subject to the
satisfaction of the court concerned.
9. In a Government Appeal bearing Government Appeal No. 454 of 2022 (State of
U.P. Vs. Geeta Devi & Anr.), this Court in similar situation has already directed the
Director, Judicial Training and Research Institute, Lucknow that an online seminar
of all the Chief Judicial Magistrates through out the Sate of Uttar Pradesh regarding
the procedures to be followed in the matter of grant of bail of the accused, who are in
jail since long and their appeals are pending for consideration.
10. Such procedures mentioned in the above Government Appeal give discretion to
the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate specially the Ilaka Magistrate to grant bail in
such cases where the purpose of issuance of non-bailable warrants is to procure the
presence of the accused especially in the cases where an accused person has acquitted
from the trial court and non-bailable warrants are issued in an appeal filed by the
State.
11. The Registrar General of this Court is directed to communicate this order
forthwith to the Director, Judicial Training and Research Institute, Lucknow within a
week from today and submit compliance report on the next date fixed.
Order on Appeal
12. List this case on 30.01.2024. "
5. The Bench at Lucknow hearing the Criminal Appeal No.465 of 1999: Surendra Prasad Misra Vs.
State of U.P. and others, was not in agreement with the view expressed by the Coordinate Bench at
Allahabad in its orders dated 18.01.2024 and 19.01.2024, and has referred the matter to the Hon'ble
Chief Justice by its order dated 12.03.2024. The Division Bench at Lucknow has framed the
following questions for consideration by a Larger Bench: -
"1. Whether the Chief Judicial Magistrate or any other Magistrate can enlarge an
acquitted person or a person convicted of an offence on bail, even in a case, wherein
an Appeal against acquittal or conviction, as the case maybe, the High Court or any
other Appellate Court has issued non-bailable warrant for securing his presence
without any such stipulation there in for release by the Court below, when such
non-bailable warrant has been issued at a subsequent stage of Appeal and not at the
admission stage?
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
5

"2. Assuming the Magistrate has jurisdiction as referred in question No.1, whether a
general direction of a mandatory nature can be issued by the High Court to the
Magistrate for such release, as has been done vide order dated 18.01.2024
Government Appeal No. 454 of 2022 and order dated 19.01.2024, Govt Appeal No.
2552 of 1981? does it not deprive the Magistrate of his discretion in this regard to
consider such release on case to case basis in view of the law discussed?
"3. Whether the observations and directions as contained in the order dated
18.01.2024 in Govt Appeal No. 454 of 2022: State of U.P. Vs. Geeta Devi and another
and the directions dated 19.01.2024 in Govt Appeal No. 2552 of 1981, State of U.P.
Vs. Shamsuddin Khan and others are in accordance with law?
"4. What are the modes prescribed in law for securing the presence of acquitted
person or one who has been convicted, in an Appeal before the High Court and what
should be the course to be ordinarily adopted by the High Court in exercise of its
appellate criminal jurisdiction for securing such presence to facilitate hearing of such
appeals?
"5. Whether an Appeal, either against acquittal or conviction, can be heard by
appointing an Amicus Curiae for the accused-respondent or the convicted appellant,
as the case maybe, in the event he is not appearing in the proceedings, though his
presence can be secured, without his consent and without any intimation to him, if
so, under what circumstances?"
6. After this Larger Bench was constituted and the matter came up before this Court, it was pointed
out that Criminal Appeal No.465 of 1999 will remain pending during the course of arguments and
till judgement is rendered in this reference, although the questions that have been referred to this
Court by the Division Bench had nothing at all to do with the merits of Criminal Appeal No. 465 of
1999, but related to the general practice and procedure to be followed in hearing of criminal appeals.
This Court therefore passed an order on 22.03.2024, directing the registry to separate the record of
Criminal Appeal No. 465 of 1999 and send it to the appropriate Bench for decision on its own merits
and to register the Reference under different cause title i.e. :-"in re-Procedure to be followed in
Hearing of Criminal Appeals"
7. Also, this Court was of the opinion by a majority of 2:1, that during the pendency of the Reference,
the directions by the Division Bench at Allahabad in Government Appeal No. 454 of 2022, and Govt.
Appeal No.2552 of 1981 should remain stayed and ordered accordingly.
8. We had asked all members of the Bar to address the Court with regard to the questions that were
framed and referred to us as we were of the opinion that it would be of great interest to all the
members of the Bar that the questions referred to us are deliberated upon with the assistance of all
the members of the Bar as answers to such questions would govern the procedure to be followed by
this Court in all criminal appeals in future.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
6

9. We must at the outset express our great appreciation for the efforts made by all young members
of the Bar and also by the learned Government Advocate and his team of Additional Government
Advocates in helping this Court thrash out the matter threadbare, and render its answers to the
questions aforesaid.
10. Sri Nadeem Murtaza has argued that several types of Appeals are provided under Cr.P.C. and
besides Appeals against conviction and acquittal, Chapter 29 of the Cr.P.C. provides for other types
of appeals to the High Court ,viz:-
Section 372 - right of victims to prefer an Appeal against acquittal or against
conviction for a lesser offence or against imposition of inadequate compensation.
Section 374 - Appeal against conviction.
Section 377 - Appeals by State Government on the ground of inadequacy of sentence.
Section 378- Appeals against acquittal (only with the leave of the High Court).
The Chapter with respect to Appeals in Cr.P.C. is neither absolute nor exhaustive, as
many provisions relating to Appeals before the High Court are provided in Cr.P.C.
outside the said Chapter as well, which are as follows: -
Section 86- Appeals from orders rejecting applications for restoration of attached
property.
Section 341 - Appeals with respect to offences affecting the administration of justice.
Section 449 - Appeal from orders under Section 446 (that is in cases of forfeiture of
bonds).
11. It has been argued by Sri Nadeem Murtaza that questions posted by the Reference order by the
Division Bench at Lucknow for consideration before this Court do not strictly come under the
purview of Section 390 Cr.P.C., as the power under the Section is exercised at the time of admission
of Appeal while such questions relate specifically to non-appearance of a person at a subsequent
stage of an Appeal, that is when it has been admitted and the matter is ripe for final hearing.
12. With regard to directions to the CJM or any other Magistrate to enlarge an acquitted person or a
person convicted of an offence on bail, even in cases where the High Court has issued non-bailable
warrant is concerned, a reference has been made to Chapter VI of the Cr.P.C., which relates to
processes to compel appearance which are divided into four distinct parts, i.e. A- Summons; B-
warrant of arrest; C-Proclamation and Attachment; and D- other rules regarding process.
Part B of Chapter VI relating to warrant of arrest starts from Section 70 and ends with Section 81.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
7

Section 70 provides for the form of arrest warrant and its duration. Section 70 (2) clarify that every
warrant shall remain in force until the same is cancelled by the Court, which issued it or until it is
executed by means of arrest of the person against whom warrant is issued .
Section 71 provides for a discretion to the Court while issuing warrant of arrest to Direct, taking of
security from the arrested person for his attendance before the Court at a specified time, and in case
such security is provided, the person who is arrested is to be released after compliance of the same.
Section 72 provides that warrant can be directed to one or more Police officers, and the same can be
executed by all or by any one or more of them.
Section 73 provides that the Magistrate may direct a warrant to any person within his local
jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict, proclaimed offender, or any person who is accused
of a non-bailable offence and is avoiding arrest. Section 73(3) provides that when the person against
whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be made over with the warrant to the nearest
Police officer, shall cause him to be taken before a Magistrate having jurisdiction, unless security is
taken under Section 71.
Section 74 provides that a warrant directed to a Police officer may also be executed by any other
Police officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed.
Section 75 provides for notification of the warrant.
Section 76 provides that the Police officer or the person executing the warrant shall, without
unnecessary delay, bring the person arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to
produce such person. Although what would the course of law in such case be before which the
arrested person is required by law to be brought is not mentioned in the Section, the proviso to the
said Section clarifies that the delay in producing the person arrested in any case, shall not exceed 24
hours, exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's
Court. It is evident that after being arrested in pursuance of a warrant, a person is required to be
produced before the nearest Magistrate within 24 hours, however, Section 76 does not provide for
the options/choices available to the Magistrate after production of the arrested person. Rather,
Section 76 is only relatable to the powers and duties of the Police officer or the person who has
arrested any person against whom the warrant has been issued.
Section 77 to Section 80 relate to arrest made outside the Local jurisdiction of the Court issuing a
warrant.
Section 77 provides that warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India.
Section 78 provides that when a warrant is to be executed outside the jurisdiction of the Court
issuing it, such Court may instead of directing the warrant to a Police officer, forward it by post or
otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of
Police, within the local limits of the Court, within the jurisdiction of which it is to be executed.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
8

Section 78(2) provides that the Court issuing a warrant under subsection (1) shall forward, along
with the warrant, the substance of the information against the person to be arrested, together with
such documents, if any, as maybe sufficient to enable the Court acting under Section 81, to decide
whether bail should or should not be granted to the person.
Section 79 provides for the procedure to be adopted for the execution of warrant by the Executive
Magistrate or by Police officer, not below the rank of an officer in charge of a Police Station, and
Section 80 provides for procedure of arrest of the person for whom the warrant has been issued.
13. Sri Nadeem Murtaza has argued that different Benches of this Court follow different standards
for issuing Non Bailable Warrants and he has also placed before this Court different orders passed
by the Court in Appellate Jurisdiction issuing non-bailable warrants against the convict-appellant or
the respondent-accused. It has been argued that although the Supreme Court has repeatedly
observed that non-bailable warrants should be issued as a last resort after the litigant fails to
respond to notices/summons and bailable warrants; sometimes this Court in a routine manner has
issued non-bailable warrants against the appellants and directed the Magistrate to place the
appellants into custody and send them to jail when they are arrested or surrender before the Court
and the Magistrate is directed to submit his report on the date fixed in the matter. Sometimes
non-bailable warrants are issued with a specific direction that as and when the appellants are
arrested or surrender before the Court, they shall be enlarged on bail by the C.J.M. concerned on
their furnishing two adequate sureties and a personal bond, each of them for a like amount, and on
the undertaking that they will remain present before this Court on the next date fixed either
personally or through Counsel. On other occasions, the Court while issuing non-bailable warrant has
noticed that the Appeal is pending since long and that the appellants were released on bail but no
one has appeared on their behalf to argue the matter. Sometimes, the Court has directed
preparation of paper book or has summoned Trial Court record and simultaneously the Court has
directed notice to be issued to the sureties under Section 446 Cr.P.C. as also issued a non-bailable
warrant. Sometimes the Court has issued non-bailable warrant with a specific direction that in case
such non-bailable warrant is not executed, the C.J.M. concerned shall file his personal affidavit.
14. In the case of Raj Narayan, Criminal Appeal No.1817 of 2003, decided on 23.06.2023 initially no
one had turned up on behalf of the appellant to press the Appeal and this Court had directed
bailable warrant to be issued. The office report showed that the appellant had sold his property and
moved somewhere else. Fresh non-bailable warrant as well as process under Sections 82 and 83
Cr.P.C. against the appellant were issued and at the same time notice was issued to the sureties
under Section 446 Cr.P.C. and the CJM was directed to take help of the Senior Superintendent of
Police of the District in apprehending the appellant. The appellant was arrested and the Legal Aid
Services Authority appointed an Advocate to present his case before the High Court. He informed
the Court that the appellant had completed the period of his incarceration of seven years rigorous
imprisonment and was released from Central Jail thereafter in 2009 itself, which fact could not be
brought to the notice of the Court in the Appeal. Consequently, when no one turned up on behalf of
the appellant to the Appeal, the Court issued non-bailable warrant as well as other directions as
aforesaid. In pursuance of the non-bailable warrant issued, the appellant was arrested again and
sent to jail. The Court recalled its earlier order and directed release of the appellant forthwith.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
9

15. In Kundan Lal Criminal Appeal No.2277 of 2008, the counsel for the appellant was present in
Court, but he informed this Court that he had no contact with the appellant, and therefore, was not
in a position to argue the case. The Court hence issued non-bailable warrant against the appellant. A
supplementary affidavit was filed on the next date fixed, bringing on record the fact that the
Criminal Appeal had been filed under Section 449 Cr.P.C. for quashing the order passed by the Trial
Court by which recovery had been issued against the appellants who were only sureties of the
accused. The accused had surrendered before the Trial Court and for getting bail had submitted
fresh sureties of other persons.
16. In Rajoo Alias Ramakant Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 1, the Supreme Court was hearing the
Appeal of a person whose Appeal had been dismissed by the High Court. The Supreme Court place
reliance upon observations made by it in Sukdas Vs. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh, 1986 (2)
SCC 401, where the Supreme Court had reiterated the requirement of providing free and adequate
legal representation to an indigent person and a person accused of an offence. An accused need not
ask for legal assistance - the Court while dealing with the cases of Life imprisonment must inform
him or her of the entitlement to free legal aid. A person accused of an offence which may involve
jeopardy to his life or personal liberty is entitled to free legal assistance at State expense. However,
certain exceptions were carved out like in cases involving economic offences or offences against the
law prohibiting prostitution, or child abuse and the like, where social justice may require that free
legal services need not be provided by the State. It was also observed that neither the Constitution
nor the Legal Services Authorities Act, make any distinction between a trial and an Appeal for the
purposes of providing free legal aid to an accused or a person in custody.
17. Sri Nadeem Murtaza has also relied upon Raghuvansh Dewan Chand Bhasin Vs. State of
Maharashtra and others 2. It was argued by the Appellant that since neither Section 70, nor Section
71 of the Cr.P.C. uses the expression non-bailable, a Magistrate is not authorized to issue
non-bailable warrant of arrest, even when an accused fails to appear in Court. The Supreme Court
negatived the contention.
18. Relying upon Inder Mohan Goswami Vs. State of Uttaranchal 3, it was cautioned that before
issuing non bailable warrants, the Court should strike a balance between society's interest and
personal liberty and exercise its discretion cautiously. Referring to paragraph 53 of the judgement in
Inder Mohan Goswami, the Court stated the circumstances when non-bailable warrant could be
issued, for example when the Court was convinced that summons or bailable warrant would be
unlikely to have the desired effect, that the person will not voluntarily appear in Court. That the
Police authorities were unable to find a person.
19. In Dhananjay Rai Alias Guddu Rai Vs. State of Bihar 4, the Supreme Court was dealing with a
case of dismissal of an appellant-convict's Appeal which was initially admitted by the High Court for
hearing, but subsequently dismissed without adverting to its merits on the ground that the appellant
was absconding. The Supreme Court observed that the Court could not deviate from the settled
principle of law that once appellate Court had refused to dismiss the Appeal summarily, the same
must be heard on merits. Sections 385 and 386 Cr.P.C. do not envisage the dismissal of the Appeal
for default or non-prosecution, but only contemplate disposal on merits after perusal of the record.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
10

The plain language of Section 385 makes it clear that if the appellate Court does not consider the
Appeal fit for summary dismissal, it must call for the record and Section 386 mandates that after the
record is received, the Appellate Court may dispose of the Appeal after hearing the accused or his
counsel. The law clearly expects the appellate Court to dispose of the Appeal on merits not merely by
perusing the reasoning of the trial Court in the judgement impugned, but by cross checking the
reasoning with the evidence on record with a view to satisfy itself that the reasoning and findings
recorded by the Trial Court are consistent with the material on record. The Court referred to
judgement rendered in Bani Singh Vs. State of U.P. 11, and Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of U.P. 12,
and K.S. Pandurang Vs. State of Karnataka 13, and also observed that the Court is not necessarily
required to adjourn the case if both the appellant and his lawyer are absent. It can dispose of the
Appeal after perusing the record and judgement of the Trial Court.
In K. Muruganandam and others Vs. State 5, the Supreme Court observed that the High Court
cannot dismiss an Appeal against conviction, if the accused does not appear through counsel
appointed by him/her. The Court is obliged to proceed with the hearing of the case only after
appointing Amicus Curiae.
20. It has been argued that Rajoo (supra) has been quoted with approval in Anokhi Lal Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh 7, where referring to Article 39A, the Supreme Court observed that it provides for
free legal aid to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason
of economic or other disabilities. The Legal Services Authorities Act 1987 has been enacted to
achieve the mandate of Article 39A. Right to free legal services is an essential ingredient of
reasonable, fair and just procedure for a person accused of an offence and is implicit in the right
guaranteed by Article 21. The Supreme Court relied upon the Best Bakery case viz. Zahira
Habibullah Sheikh and another vs. State of Gujarat 8, and judgement rendered in Mohammad
Hussain Vs. State 9; and emphasized that the object of criminal trial is to search for the truth, and
the trial is not a bout over technicalities and must be conducted in such manner as will protect the
innocent and punish the guilty.
21. Sri Nadeem Murtaza has placed reliance upon judgement rendered by a Full Bench of the High
Court of Gujarat in Niraj Devnarayan Shukla and others Vs. State of Gujarat 10, where considering
the difference of opinion between two coordinate benches Regarding how a Criminal Appeal under
Section 374 Cr.P.C. filed by a convict who is absconding at the time of final hearing has to be dealt
with.
22. After answering the question, the Larger Bench also elaborated the procedure to be adopted by
the High Court while dealing with a conviction Appeal, at final hearing stage, when the Advocate
and/or convict is not available to assist the Court.
The Larger Bench referred to the judgement rendered in Bani Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 11,
and Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of U.P. 12, K.S. Panduranga Vs. State of Karnataka 13 and Dilip S
Dahanukar Vs. Kotak Mahindra Company Limited 14, and then the Larger Bench observed in
paragraph 22 as follows: -
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
11

"22. In view of the ratio laid down by the Apex Court, we are of the opinion that a
High Court while dealing with a conviction Appeal where in the convict/Advocate
is/are not available, following procedure is required to be considered at the time of
final hearing:
i. If the Advocate appearing for the appellant convict is present and is ready to
proceed with the Appeal, the Court has to decide the same on merits and a reasoned
judgement is to be delivered, even if the convict is absconding.
It is needless to say that the convict should always be subjected to consequences of
his abscondence.
ii. If the convict is absconding and his Advocate is absent, and if the convict has
jumped the bail/temporary bail granted by the High Court, the High Court itself shall
take recourse provided under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code to
secure the presence of the absconding convict and can issue non-bailable warrant,
passing orders of attachment of his property, declaring him, proclaimed offender, et
cetera, under Sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
After exhausting all possible effort, if the convict could not be traced out, and if the
High Court is satisfied and is of the opinion that the convict is recalcitrant and has
shown total disrespect to the orders passed by the High Court and has jumped the
bail /temporary bail, the High Court can exercise its inherent power under Section
482 of the Code and can dismiss the Appeal.
iii. If the convict was released pursuant to orders passed by the concerned
department of the State/Jail Authority (like furlough leave, et cetera) and is not
available at the time of hearing of the Appeal, the jail Authority shall submit a
detailed report to the High Court about the steps undertaken by the concerned
department/jail Authority to secure the presence of the absconding convict. If the
High Court is satisfied with its report and comes to the conclusion that the convict is
recalcitrant and has shown scant respect to the judicial system, his Appeal can be
dismissed.
iv. If the Appeal is dismissed on the ground of non-availability of convict and
subsequently, if the convict surrenders or is arrested, he may file application for
restoration of his Appeal for hearing the same on merits.
23. In paragraph 23, the Larger Bench of Gujarat High Court observed-
"23. It is needless to say that if the Bench comes across a Criminal Appeal, where it
finds that the case of absconding convict does not fall in any of the above referred
contingencies, it can exercise its inherent powers provided under Section 482 of the
Code, which would entitle it to make such orders as may be necessary to secure the
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
12

ends of justice. Considering the decision by the honourable Apex Court, in the case of
Bani Singh (supra), K.S. Panduranga (supra), as well as in the case of Surya Baksh
Singh (supra), and considering the several decisions, we hereby hold that the ratio
laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bani Singh, K.S. Panduranga
(supra) read with Surya Baksh Singh (supra) would hold the field in case of an
absconding convict and not the ratio laid down by the Court, in the case of Dilip S.
Dahanukar (supra) as the same deals with Sections 357 and 374 of the Code----.."
24. Sri Nadeem Murtaza has placed reliance upon a judgement rendered by the Supreme Court on
01.05.2024 in Criminal Appeal No.1074 of 2017: Sharif Ahmed Vs. State of U.P., where it has been
observed that non-bailable warrants should not be issued as a matter of course. Reliance has also
been placed upon Supreme Court judgement in Satyendra Kumar Antil vs C.B.I. 15, and Inder
Mohan Goswami Vs. State of Uttaranchal 3. Even where non-bailable warrants are issued, the High
Court should direct listing of such cases on a priority basis and a separate heading be created in the
cause list for such appeals. Where the accused is re-arrested in pursuance of non-bailable warrants
only to ensure his presence, the Magistrate should immediately send a report regarding execution of
warrant and an attempt be made to decide such appeals or pass appropriate orders as expeditiously
as possible. It has been suggested by Shri Nadeem Murtaza that if an accused is arrested and
Magistrate has not been given any specific direction regarding enlarging such accused on bail or
sending him to jail, still, there are certain exceptional circumstances where the Magistrate be
allowed to consider releasing the arrested person on bail. There is no express bar under the Cr.P.C.
to release such person on bail by the Magistrate and Sri Nadeem Murtaza has placed reliance upon
judgement rendered in Sarah Matthew Vs. Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases 16, Dhanna Lal Vs.
Kalavati Bai 17, where the Supreme Court has observed that Cr.P.C. is a procedural law and it is well
settled that procedural law must be liberally construed to serve as handmaiden of justice and not as
its mistress.
25. Sri Apoorva Tiwari, along with Akash Singh, Shivang Tiwari, Advocates, has argued that the
concept of fair trial entails familiar triangulation of interest of the accused, the victim and the
society acting through the State and the prosecuting agencies. Public interest in proper
administration of justice must be given as much importance as the interest of the individual
accused. Reliance has been placed on judgement rendered in Zahira Habibulla Sheikh and another
Vs. State of Gujarat 8, Dayal Singh Vs. State of Uttaranchal 18, and Mohammed Firoz Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh, 19.
26. Sri Apoorva Tewari has also pointed out the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case
of State (NCT of Delhi) Vs. Shiv Kumar Yadav 20, and reliance has been placed upon paragraphs 10
and 11 Where the Supreme Court has observed that :-
"fairness of trial has to be seen, not only from the point of view of the accused, but
also from the point of view of the victim and the Society. In the name of fair trial, the
system cannot be held to ransom, though the accused is entitled to be represented by
a counsel of his choice, to be provided all relevant documents, to cross examine the
prosecution witnesses and to lead evidence in his defence."
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
13

27. Sri Apoorva Tiwari has also placed reliance upon judgement entered in Somesh Chaurasia Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh 21, where the Supreme Court placed reliance upon observations made by it
in Abdul Basit Vs. Mohammed Abdul Qadir Chaudhary 22.
In paragraph 42 and 43 of the judgement in Somesh Chaurasia 21, the Supreme Court had observed
us: -
"42.This Court in Pampapathy Vs. State of Mysore, 1966 Supplement SCR 477; had
held that the High Court had the power to revoke the suspension of sentence granted
under sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 426 in Criminal Procedure Code, 1898, using
its inherent power under Section 561A of the Cr.P.C. 1898. Where the accused were
alleged to have misused their liberty while the sentence was suspended. Sub-section
(1) and (2) of Section 426 Cr.P.C. 1898 are similar to Section 389 (1) of the present
Cr.P.C. It may be noted that in Pampapathy the issue of cancellation of bail of a
convict by taking recourse to Section 561A Cr.P.C., 1898, arose because the second
Proviso, which now has been added to sub-Section (1) of Section 389 Cr.P.C., did not
exist under the earlier legal framework. However, since the second Proviso to
Sub-section (1) of Section 389 Cr.P.C. now deals with the cancellation of bail, no
inherent power would be required for cancellation of suspension of a sentence and
bail granted to a convicted person during the pendency of the Appeal at the appellate
Court.
"43. This Court in its order passed in Ramesh Kumar Singh Vs. Jhabbar Singh 2003
(10) SCC 195 has held that if the accused misused the liberty by committing other
offences during the suspension of sentence under Section 389 (1) Cr.P.C., they are
not entitled to the privilege of being released on bail. In that case, the accused was
convicted under Section 302 I.P.C. for killing the father of the complainant. During
the suspension of his sentence, when he was out on bail, he had committed the
murder of the brothers of the complainant. This Court set aside the bail that was
granted to the accused by the High Court."
28. Sri Apoorva Tiwari has also placed reliance upon Purshottam Vs. State of Tamil Nadu 23, where
the Supreme Court was considering the case of an appellant - accused who was convicted by the trial
Court for offence under Section 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012. The
Appeal against conviction preferred by the appellant was admitted by the High Court in 2018 and
the substantive sentence of the appellant was suspended and he was ordered to be enlarged on bail.
When the Appeal came up for hearing in July 2023, his Advocate sought adjournment for four
weeks. Only on the ground that the appellant is enjoying the facility of bail and that his Advocate
applied for adjournment, the High Court proceeded to cancel the bail. The Supreme Court observed
that-
".....in a given case if the Advocate appearing for the appellant-accused sought
adjournment on untenable and unreasonable grounds, the appellate Court is well
within its power to refuse the prayer for adjournment. In such a case, one of the
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
14

courses suggested by a decision of this Court in the case of Bani Singh Vs. State of
U.P. can always be adopted by the High Court. The High Court has a discretion to
appoint an Advocate to espouse the cause of the appellant when the Advocate
appointed by the appellant refuses to argue the Appeal on unreasonable grounds.
Though the High Court has an option of considering the merits of the Appeal and
deciding the same on merits, the High Court should always adopt the first course of
appointing an Advocate to espouse the cause of the appellant. Referring to the second
proviso to Sub-section (1) of Section 389 of the Cr.P.C. the Court can even Suo Moto
issue a a notice calling upon the accused to show cause why his bail should not be
cancelled. Under no circumstances, the bail granted to an accused under subsection
(1) of Section 389 can be cancelled without giving a reasonable opportunity to the
accused of being heard. For the default of the Advocate appointed by the accused, the
appellate Court cannot penalise the accused by proceeding to cancel his bail only on
the ground that his Advocate has sought an adjournment and that also without giving
an opportunity of being heard to him on the issue of cancellation of bail."
It has also been observed in Purshottam (supra) that the High Court should not reject an application
for suspension of sentence only because the Advocate for the accused declined to argue the Appeal
on merits. When only the application for suspension of sentence is listed for hearing the Advocate
for the accused is not expected to be ready to argue the Appeal on its merits.
29. Sri Apoorva Tewari has also pointed out Chapter 18 Rule 22 and Rule 41 of the High Court Rules
where provisions of giving notice to the Government Advocate, to the accused-respondent, and to
convict appellant has been set out and it has been provided that a list of cases ready for hearing has
to be pasted on the Notice Board from time to time.
30. Sri Apoorva Tewari has also placed reliance upon Ashish Chaddha Vs. Asha Kumari and another
24, and paragraphs 18, 27, 28 and 29 thereof, to argue that sometimes the accused may deliberately
avoid appearance in Court and then take the plea of Section 303 of the Cr.P.C. and challenge the
order of the Trial Court on the ground that he was denied right to be defended by Counsel of his
choice. The Court may look into the facts and circumstances of the case and then decide for itself,
whether the accused was only indulging in dilatory tactics and may reject such plea.
31. In Madan Mohan Vs. State of Rajasthan and others 25, the Supreme Court has observed that
under Section 437 to 439 of the Cr.P.C. grant or rejection of bail is the discretion of the Court
considering it, the High Court cannot direct the Subordinate Court to consider and allow the bail
application on the same day on which it is filed, it can only direct the accused persons to approach
the trial Court for grant of bail and if any application is filed, it would be decided by the trial Court
on its merits and in accordance with law expeditiously.
32. In a Full Bench decision of this Court, in Dinesh Kumar Singh Alias Sonu Vs. State of U.P. and
others. The question formulated for consideration was: -
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
15

"Whether a judge of Honble High Court sitting alone or judges sitting in a Division
Bench, hearing any matter in his/their determination assigned by Hon'ble the Chief
Justice, can overstep into determination of another Bench, if any issue or question
arises in the matter, including a question in public interest, which is not connected to
the matter before him/them, and which, in his/their opinion is necessary to be
decided, and further in such case where in his/their discretion, it is necessary to
decide such question, what should be the procedure to be adopted?"
33. The Full Bench in Dinesh Singh referred to observations made by another Full Bench of this
Court in Smt. Maya Dixit Vs. State of U.P. 26, which had also considered the question whether a
Bench conferred/assigned a particular work in terms of Chapter V of the Allahabad High Court
Rules can hear matters assigned to another Bench and in paragraphs 17 and 17A observed that the
Division Bench assigned with a particular work can only do the work assigned and cannot do the
work assigned to another Division Bench, even in respect of an earlier matter which it was hearing.
Even if a Bench was hearing a matter assigned to it as per the roster, and if in the course of hearing,
it proceeds to consider relief not sought in the petition, but which will fall within the PIL
jurisdiction, then the Bench is bound to direct the Registry to place the matter before the Chief
Justice for appropriate directions or before the appropriate PIL Bench. In other words, if that Bench
is not assigned P.I.L. work, it cannot proceed to hear the matter.
34. In State of U.P. and others Vs. Anil Kumar Sharma and another 27, the Supreme Court was
considering an order passed by the High Court sitting in writ jurisdiction which directed the State to
amend procedure prescribed under Section 209 Cr.P.C. regarding committal of cases by Magistrate
to Sessions Court by enabling the Police to file charge-sheet in connection with sessions cases
directly before the Sessions Court and also considering the delay in trial due to non-arrest of
accused persons by Police, it directed trial Court not to accept the charge-sheet under Section 173
Cr.P.C. unless the accused persons were produced before them and also directing photocopy
machines to be installed in Police station for preparing copies of all documents required to be
supplied under Section 207 Cr.P.C. to the accused persons forthwith. The Supreme Court observed
that while the directions were issued with the laudable object in mind they could not have been
issued as the Division Bench was not sitting in PIL jurisdiction and also the Central Government
which was not even a party in the writ petition was directed to get amended the Cr.P.C.
35. Sri S.M. Singh Royekwar has argued more or less in the same terms as other Advocates, and has
stated that in the matter of Appeal against conviction, if the High Court or any other Appellate
Court, at a subsequent stage of the Appeal, issues non-bailable warrant for securing presence of a
convict on bail, only such appellate Court has the power to enlarge the person so arrested on bail.
The C.J.M. or any other Magistrate does not have the power to enlarge such arrested person on bail.
If N.B.W. is issued by the Appellate Court through the C.J.M. concerned, even then the power to
enlarge the person arrested lies only with the Court. In matter of appeals against acquittal before the
High Court, if the High Court issues a non-bailable warrant for securing the presence of the
acquitted respondent, at a subsequent stage of the Appeal, release of such person on bail after
arrest, pursuant to execution of Non Bailable Warrant by the C.J.M. will depend upon the
nature/language of direction issued by the High Court under Section 390 Cr.P.C. on a case to case
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
16

basis.
36. It has also been argued by Sri S.M. Singh Royekwar that no general direction of mandatory
nature can be issued by the High Court to the Magistrate in all/any circumstances, even if the
Magistrate has jurisdiction in limited cases in view of Section 390 Cr.P.C., for release of person
arrested in an Appeal against acquittal if non-bailable warrant has been issued by the Court. As such
the observations and directions issued by the Division Bench at Allahabad are not in accordance
with law.
37. It has been argued by Sri Royekwar that the modes for securing the presence of acquitted person
or a convicted person, released on bail, when an Appeal comes up for hearing before the Appellate
Court, are governed by Chapter VI of the Cr.P.C. No uniform, straightjacket formula /course/mode
can be laid down to be ordinarily adopted by the High Court in such matters for facilitating hearing
of the Appeal. It would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
38. It has also been argued that hearing of an Appeal against a conviction can take place by
appointing an Amicus for such accused-respondent or convict-appellant, in case he has jumped bail
or his Advocate fails to appear and assist the Court repeatedly during the hearing of the Appeal.
Such appointment of Amicus by the Appellate Court should not be delayed and the Appellate Court
should not be required to intimate such person who has failed to appear and obtain his consent as
the presence of such person cannot be easily secured. It is only in exceptional circumstances where
the person who is an accused is in jail, then intimation and consent must be obtained as such person
has not wilfully defaulted in appearing before the Court for expeditious disposal of the Appeal. He
may be suffering from various incapacities to pursue his matter in Appeal owing to his continued
incarceration.
39. Sri S. M. Singh Royekwar has pointed out a judgement rendered by the Supreme Court in the
case of Dhananjay Rai Alias Guddu Rai Vs. State of Bihar 4, where the Supreme Court has reiterated
the law as settled in the case of Anokhi Lal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 7 and observed that a
Criminal Appeal can very well be decided after appointing an Amicus Curiae in case the accused or
his counsel is not turning up to assist the Court. Such an exercise however, should be undertaken
with care and before appointing such Amicus the accused should be put to notice either through
summons or by means of issuance of bailable warrant regarding listing of the Appeal for hearing and
absence of the counsel representing the accused despite knowledge of the same. The accused cannot
then claim at a later stage that he was deprived of opportunity to appoint a counsel of his choice. It
has also been argued that in old criminal appeals which are listed for final hearing and disposal
suddenly after decades, circumstances may justify the absence of counsel to represent the Appellant
and in such cases, service of bailable warrant to the appellant may facilitate engagement of a new
Counsel as the appellant would derive knowledge of absence of his earlier counsel.
40. Sri S.M. Singh Royekwar has placed reliance upon a Full Bench decision of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court, in State of Punjab Vs. Bachitter Singh and others, Criminal Appeal No.588 of
1971 rendered on 13.09.1971 and reported in 1972 (1) ILR (Punjab and Haryana). In paragraph 10,
the Court was dealing with Section 427 of the old Cr.P.C. 1898, which is corresponding to Section
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
17

390 Cr.P.C. 1973, and after quoting the language of the Section, the Court observed: -
"It is apparent even on a cursory perusal of the language above said that there exists
no statutory bar whatsoever for the release on bail of persons against whom acquittal
appeals have been preferred. The Statute draws no distinction whatsoever between
appeals on charges and the others. In fact, the Section makes express provision for
the grant of bail pending the disposal of such Appeal. Even the issuance of a warrant
in the beginning is entirely discretionary and the Appellate Court, even at the initial
stage of the admission of the Appeal may well stay its hand and remain content with
directing a notice, summons, or bailable borders without requiring arrest or
apprehension of the respondent accused persons.- - - the intention of the legislature
is highlighted and brought into bold relief when compared with similar provision,
empowering the grant of bail to persons appealing against conviction. Section 426 (1)
(2) Cr.P.C., is in the following terms: -
"426(1). Pending any Appeal by a convicted person, the appellate Court may, for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the sentence or
order appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be
released on bail or on his own bond.
"426(2). The power conferred by this Section on an Appellate Court may be exercised
also by the High Court in the case of any Appeal by a convicted person to a Court
subordinate thereto"
"Comparing the two provisions, it is obvious that whilst Section 426, Cr.P.C.
envisages the recording of the reasons for the suspension of the sentence and the
grant of bail, no such restriction or qualification has been imposed by law under
Section 427, Cr.P.C 1898. A wholly unfettered power is given under Section 427
Cr.P.C. 1898, to release the accused person on bail if at all their custody has been
originally directed. Again in Section 427, bail may not only be granted by the High
Court itself, but it may direct that the accused person may be brought before any
subordinate Court and the power to admit such person to bail may be relegated to the
subordinate Courts. Hence, far from suggesting any statutory bar, the relevant
provisions of Section 427 Cr.P.C. 1828, exhibit an intention of the legislature,
conforming with judicial dictum that the grant of bail is the rule and its refusal is an
exception."
41. Shri Royekwar has also referred to paragraph 17 of judgement rented in Praneeta Prakash
Navage Vs. State of Maharashtra and others28.
42. Sri S.M. Singh Royekwar while arguing the matter has also pointed out that once the appellate
Court decides to issue warrant of arrest to secure presence of the Appellant to facilitate the hearing
of Appeal, it must specify a particular date by which it is returnable whether executed or not, and
such cases be listed in the cause list for priority hearing with mention in the cause list itself whether
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
18

such warrant bailable/non-bailable has been executed or not. In case a non-bailable warrant has
been executed and the convict has been arrested and committed to jail, the Magistrate concerned
must immediately send information to the High Court, without waiting for a specified date
mentioned in the non-bailable warrant. If information regarding execution of non-bailable warrant
is received by the Court, the Section should list the Appeal forthwith for appropriate orders under
priority hearing matters without waiting for specified date mentioned in the non-bailable warrant.
Such priority hearing appeals in which bailable warrants or non bailable warrants have been
executed should remain on board of the Court for hearing unless otherwise directed by the Appellate
Court by specific reasoned order.
43. In a case where a warrant of arrest is issued under Section 390 Cr.P.C., the High Court must
specifically mention whether after its execution the accused is to be brought before it or he has to be
produced before any other subordinate Court. If the accused is to be brought before the High Court,
then again immediately information has to be sent on his arrest to the High Court by the Magistrate
concerned and the matter be listed in the list under the heading of "priority hearing". Also the High
Court while issuing the warrant may direct the subordinate Court that after execution of such
warrant he be released on bail or committed to prison. In case the High Court leaves it open to the
Subordinate Court to decide the application as per its discretion, the High Court should specifically
mention by a separate order the particulars of the case, for example, the attending circumstances in
which the warrant has been issued, the nature and gravity of the offence, the relevant antecedents of
the accused, the nature of evidence, the age and medical condition, if any, of the accused and the
duration of pendency of the Appeal and the last date of listing of such appeal in its order. The
Magistrate must immediately inform the High Court regarding the arrest of the accused once he was
produced before it pursuant to such directions of the High Court.
44. Sri Naved Ali, while arguing on questions 1, 2 and 3 of the Referral order has referred to the
inherent powers that can be exercised by the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and under
Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution. He referred to the judgement rendered in Popular Muthaiah
Vs. State represented by Inspector of Police 29, where the Supreme Court had observed that the
High Court while exercising its Revisional or Appellate power may also exercise its inherent power,
both in relation to substantive and also procedural matters, sometimes even Suo Moto in the
interest of justice. No application is required to be filed therefor. However, power under Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. is not unlimited and has to be exercised by the Court only where the Cr.P.C. is silent.
Where there is a specific provision in the Code such power will not be exercised. Power under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. is exercised Ex Debito Justitiae and can do real and substantial justice.
45. Sri Naved Ali has argued that in Sanjay Dubey Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 30. The Supreme
Court while dismissing an Appeal filed by Inspector Incharge of a Police station against whom
certain observations were made by the High Court while hearing a bail application, had observed
that High Court is a Constitutional Court possessing a wide repertoire of powers. High Court has
original, appellate and Suo Moto powers under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution. The powers
under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution are meant for taking care of situations in which the
High Court feels that some directions/orders are required in the interest of justice.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
19

46. But in paragraph 14 of the judgement in Sanjay Dubey 30, the Supreme Court observed: -
"We are of the view that learned single Bench could have directed institution of
separate proceedings taking recourse to Article 226 of the Constitution, after
formulating reasons and points for consideration. Thereafter, the matter should have
been referred to the learned Chief Justice of the High Court for placing it before an
appropriate Bench, which would proceed in accordance withlaw, of course, after
affording adequate opportunity to the person(s) proceeded against."
47. It was argued by Sri Naved Ali that the Supreme Court recognized the inherent power of the
High Court under Article 226 or 227 and even under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to issue necessary
directions for the furtherance of justice. However, if any general or sweeping directions are to be
issued, then the stakeholders who are being affected by it should be first heard or the question of law
should be at first formulated and should be referred to the Chief Justice of that particular High
Court, who would subsequently place it before the appropriate Bench.
48. Sri Naved Ali has also pointed out Chapter VI of the Cr.P.C., which deals with "Process to
Compel Appearance". Referring to Sections 70 and 71 of the Cr.P.C. and Form 2 of Schedule II of the
Cr.P.C., it has been argued that it only talks of warrant of arrest. Hence, if the High Court issuing the
warrant of arrest had in its discretion directed, in specific terms that the person against whom such
warrant of arrest has been made, should execute a bond with sufficient sureties for ensuring his
attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter, then it would be termed as a bailable
warrant. However, if no such direction/endorsement/specification to take sureties has been made in
terms of Section 71 of the Cr.P.C. on the warrant of arrest, then the said warrant of arrest would be
deemed as a non-bailable warrant. The persons who are arrested would be brought before the Court
who has issued the non-bailable warrant, and it would have an option to either send him to judicial
custody/Police custody, or release him on bail. Hence, if an Appellate Court during a Criminal
Appeal issues a non-bailable warrant, the power to cancel it rests only with the Appellate Court
issuing it or if it is executed. The power to grant him bail lies only with the Appellate Court. The
C.J.M. or any other Magistrate can only enlarge a person on bail if the appellate Court while issuing
warrant of arrest specifies that sureties may be taken in the event of his arrest and in case, no such
specification has been given in the warrant of arrest the Magistrate is bound to commit such person
to custody and without delay, inform about its execution to the Appellate Court.
49. It has also been argued that assuming if a Magistrate is conferred with the discretionary power
to grant bail, specially when the Appellate Court is seized with the hearing of an Appeal where
records have been summoned, there has to be some substance of information or such documents as
may be sufficient to enable the Magistrate to decide whether the bail should or should not be
granted to such person when he is brought before him in execution of the warrant of arrest issued by
the Appellate Court. The discretionary power of the Magistrate provided to him under Section 167 of
the Cr.P.C. allows him to exercise his discretion to either remand the accused to custody or to
release him on bail but to determine the course to be adopted, a copy of the "entries in the diary",
have to be sent along with the person arrested as has been mandated under Section 167 (1) of the
Cr.P.C. It has been argued that similarly, if a Magistrate after taking cognizance issues a subsequent
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
20

process/warrant of arrest to an accused person and after execution of such process, the accused
person is arrested and brought before the Court issuing warrant of arrest, such Court has documents
before it from which it can consider as to whether such person is to be remanded to further custody
or to be granted bail under Section 437 of Cr.P.C. Even if the accused is remanded to custody under
Section 209B of the Cr.P.C.., the accused has right to move a bail application under Section 439
Cr.P.C. before the Competent Court before whom the case has been committed.
50. If the warrant of arrest is to be executed outside jurisdiction in terms of Section 78 Cr.P.C., the
Court issuing the warrant shall forward along with the warrant, the substance of information against
the person to be arrested together with such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable the
Magistrate to decide whether the bail should or should not be granted to such persons. On the basis
of Sections 71, 78, and 81 Cr.P.C., it has been argued that if at all the discretionary powers are given
to the Magistrate by means of a direction, it is imperative that he ought to have some
documents/substance on the basis of which he could exercise his discretion. However, since the
procedure in law does not provide any such discretion to the Magistrate who is merely complying
with the execution of the warrant of arrest, issued by the appellate Court, it would not be
appropriate to give any discretion to the Magistrate, except that which has already been provided
under Section 71 of the Cr.P.C.
51. Reference has been made by Shri Naved Ali to the observations made by the Supreme Court in
State of U.P. Vs. Poosu and another 31, and in Indra Mohan Goswami and another vs. State of
Uttaranchal, reported in 2007 (12) SCC 1, where in the Courts were cautioned that-
"the power being discretionary must be exercised judiciously with extreme care and
caution. The Court should properly balance both personal liberty and societal interest
before issuing warrant. There cannot be any straightjacket formula for issuance of
warrant, but as a general rule, unless accused is charged with the commission of an
offence of a heinous crime, and it is feared that he is likely to tamper or destroy the
evidence or is likely to evade the process of law, issuance of non-bailable warrants
should be avoided"
52. It has been further argued that however, once such discretion is exercised by the Court, after due
care and non-bailable warrant are issued, there is no necessity or requirement to issue blanket
directions as have been issued by the Division Bench at Allahabad, to the Magistrate to grant bail to
persons against whom such non-bailable warrant have been issued. It would only lie in the domain
of the Appellate Court issuing such warrant to exercise the power to extend any respite to person
against whom it has issued a non-bailable warrant and not to any other inferior Court.
53. In answer to question no.4, it has been submitted by Shri Naved Ali that when an Appeal against
acquittal is filed before the Appellate Court, the Court has the power to grant bail under Section 390
Cr.P.C. to the person against whom Appeal has been filed. In case of an Appeal against conviction
also the appellate Court has power to suspend the sentence awarded to the accused under Section
389 Cr.P.C. and allow him to be on bail during pendency of his Appeal. In both cases, when the
Court has exercised its power and has granted bail to the accused person, then it is implied that such
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
21

accused person has undertaken to cooperate with the hearing of the Appeal by ensuring that his
pleader will appear whenever the matter is listed and shall argue it without seeking unnecessary
adjournment. However, if there is a continuous absence of Advocate, then Court should ordinarily
issue a notice/summon (non coercive measure) to such a accused person, apprising him that
conditions implied in the bail order have been violated by him and the Appellate Court shall
consider cancelling his bail on the next date fixed or would appoint an Amicus to assist in hearing
his Appeal. On the next date fixed, the Court may after verifying the service report, cancel the bail of
such accused person and go on to hear the Appeal by appointing an Amicus Curiae. Reference has
been made by Sri Naved Ali to the judgement rendered in the case of Kabira Vs. State of U.P. 32,
where it has been emphasized that the Court should not dismiss an Appeal merely because of
non-appearance of an Advocate and instead should appoint an Amicus Curiae and then proceed to
dispose of the Appeal on its merit.
54. Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in the case of Mohammad Sukur Ali Vs. State
of Assam 33; K. Muruganandam and others Vs. State 5.
55. It has been argued that the Supreme Court has comprehensively dealt with questions 4 and 5 in
its various judgements and the same ought to be followed by this Court.
56. Sri Vikas Vikram Singh, along with Rajat Gangwar while arguing, the matter has adopted most
of the submissions made by other learned Advocates and has also emphasized that the personal
appearance of the accused respondent or the convict appellant is not ordinarily required in the High
Court where they are represented by their Counsels. If however, in case the counsel fails to appear to
assist the Court, the Court should direct issuance of summons to such person and after satisfaction
of service of notice, bailable warrant may be issued. In case bailable warrants cannot be executed,
then non-bailable should be issued. The warrants should be issued in vernacular language as the
percentage of legal literacy in India is low. The contents of the warrant should be self-explanatory
and should spell out the exact reasons for issuance of the warrant and the High Court should also
provide a dedicated helpline or email address of officials responsible in the Section dealing with
criminal appeals where the person against whom a warrant is issued may seek clarification, should
the need arise.
57. With regard to question No.4, it has been argued by Sri Vikas Vikram Singh that an Amicus may
be appointed by the High Court to facilitate the hearing of an Appeal. However, before doing so,
intimation must be sent to the accused and should also be sent to the District Legal Services
Authority. Details about District Legal Services Authority should also be sent to the accused
Respondent/convict appellant and their contact number and address should also be shared so as to
ensure that a bona fide litigant should not suffer for negligence of his/her counsel. In case after
appointment of Amicus a counsel appears for the accused, then the assistance of the Amicus Curie
should not be dispensed with, and he should ordinarily be allowed to continue till the end of
litigation as he is a friend of the Court. If on subsequent dates, the counsel for the accused again
does not appear, the Amicus should be at liberty to proceed and to argue the matter independently.
Also, while engaging an Amicus disclosure form should be taken from him or her that there is no
conflict of interest in the matter and should any such conflict arise at any time, it should be brought
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
22

to the immediate notice of the Court.
58. If the Court is satisfied that an accused has been enlarged in Appeal against conviction and he is
deliberately avoiding appearance so as to delay the disposal of the Appeal, the Court may proceed to
decide the Appeal with the help of the Amicus Curiae also simultaneously take steps to cancel the
bail of the accused and proceed as per the provisions of Cr.P.C. Also, it has been suggested that a
separate heading for such type of cases where non-bailable warrants have been issued by the Court
should be shown in the list so as to enable the Court to decide such matters on the priority basis.
59. Sri Alok Mishra, Advocate, in answer to question 1 referred to by the Division Bench at Lucknow
has stated that under Section 390 Cr.P.C., the Chief Judicial Magistrate or any Magistrate can
release a convict on bail and the circumstances in which the Division Bench at Allahabad passed the
orders dated 18.01.2024, and 19.01.2024 should be taken into account. In both cases, a person
acquitted by a trial Court was put in custody because a non-bailable warrant was issued by the High
Court without giving power to the CJM to consider the special circumstances in which the
respondent/accused was placed. The acquitted person was languishing in jail only because the
Appeal could not be taken up as soon as the non-bailable were executed, and this fact could not be
brought to the notice of the Court in time. It has been submitted by Shri Alok Mishra that even
though the Division Bench at Allahabad, while issuing mandatory directions has encroached upon
the discretion to be exercised by the Magistrate under Section 390 Cr.P.C., and has also not taken
into consideration the judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. Vs. Poosu 31, still
the Division Bench has done substantial justice and the order passed by the Division Bench at
Allahabad should not be set aside, rather it can be modified, leaving it open for the CJM to consider
the facts and circumstances of each case where the respondent, an acquitted person is brought
before him on execution of non-bailable warrant only because his Advocate failed to appear and
assist the Court when the Appeal came up for hearing.
60. It has also been argued that in so far as question No. 4 is concerned, Sections 81, 82 and 83 of
the Cr.P.C. provide the modes for securing the presence of the accused/convict and the legislature
has already taken care of the situation and the Court may not be required to pass any order in this
regard.
61. It has also been argued that in so far as the question regarding appointment of Amicus Curiae is
concerned, the Supreme Court judgement in Anokhi Lal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 7 has dealt
with the entire problem and laid down certain guidelines in paragraph 22 and 23 which must be
followed by the Larger Bench and no separate orders are necessarily required to be passed.
62. Shri Alok Mishra has also placed reliance upon a judgement rendered by the Supreme Court in
Criminal Appeal No.546 of 2011: Mohd. Sukur Ali Vs. State of Assam 33, decided on 24.02.2011,
where the Supreme Court was considering the question - "whether in a criminal case, if the counsel
for the accused does not appear, for whatever reasons, should the case be decided in the absence of
the counsel against the accused, or the Court should appoint Amicus Curiae to defend the accused?"
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
23

The Supreme Court referred to a judgement rendered by the Supreme Court of
United States of America in Powel v Alabama 287 U.S. 45 (1932); where it was
observed: -
"What, then, does a hearing include? Historically and in practice, in our own country
at least, it has always included the right to the aid of counsel when desired to be
provided by the party asserting the right. The right to be heard would be, in many
cases, of little avail if it did not comprehend the right to be heard by Counsel. Even
the intelligent and educated layman has small and sometimes no skill in the science
of law. If charged with crime, he is in capable generally, of determining for himself,
whether the indictment is good or bad. He is unfamiliar with the rules of evidence.
Left without the aid of counsel he may be put on trial without a proper charge, and
convicted upon incompetent evidence, or evidence irrelevant to the issue or
otherwise inadmissible. He lacks the skill and knowledge adequately to prepare his
defence, even though he may have a perfect one. He requires the guiding hand of a
Counsel at every step in the proceedings against him. Without it, though he be not
guilty, he faces the danger of conviction because he does not know how to establish
his innocence. If that be true of men of intelligence, how much more true is it of
ignorant and illiterate, or those of feeble intellect. If in any case, civil or criminal, a
State or Federal Court were arbitrarily to refuse to hear a party by counsel, employed
by, and appearing for him, it reasonably may not be doubted That such refusal would
be a denial of a hearing, and therefore, of due process in the constitutional sense."
63. The above decision of the U.S. Supreme Court was cited with approval by the Supreme Court in
A.S. Mohammed Rafi Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and others 34.
A similar view was also taken by the Supreme Court in Man Singh and another Vs. State of Madhya
Pradesh 35, and in Bapu Limbaji Kamble Vs. State of Maharashtra 36.
64. Sri Ayush Tandon has drawn this Court's attention to Chapter XVIII Rule (1) and (2) of the
Allahabad High Court Rules which relates to presentation of appeals and applications for revision in
criminal matters. The Court may not admit an Appeal if it finds that it is not complete as requisite
papers are missing or is otherwise it is not in order or has not been presented within time, and it
may also decline to receive it or rejected or pass such order as it may consider fit. Where the Court
finds that such petition or application is in order and has been presented in time and is
accompanied by the requisite papers, it may in case of an Appeal, make an order admitting it and
directing notice to be issued and in case of an application for revision, dismiss it or direct notice to
be issued or pass such other order as it may think fit. The proviso to Rule (2) clarifies that nothing in
the Rule shall preclude the Bench from dismissing any Appeal under Section 384 of the Cr.P.C., or
require notice of an application to be issued where notice of such application has already been
served upon the other party or his Advocate.
65. It has been argued that it is not always that presentation of Appeal leads to an order of
admission. In case an Appeal is admitted, it is not always that a warrant or bailable or otherwise is
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
24

issued. Sometimes the Court may only issue notice to the respondent while admitting the Appeal.
It has also been argued that though the Magistrate does not have power to release a person on bail,
in case the High Court has ordered non-bailable warrants to be issued, he can take sureties and
verify such authorities and copies of papers may be presented to the High Court for further orders.
66. Learned Government Advocate Dr. V.K. Singh, along with Sri Umesh Verma, learned A.G.A.-1
and Sri Shivendra Shivam Singh Rathore, in answer to question No.1 framed by the Division Bench
at Lucknow, referred to the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in Criminal Bail
Application No.265 of 2012 in Criminal Appeal No.812 of 2011: Balakrishna Mahadev Lad Vs. State
of Maharashtra 37. The judgement was delivered by Hon'ble Justice A.M. Khanvilkar (as he then
was). It was observed by the Full Bench at Bombay High Court as follows:-
"Similarly, if the High Court were to issue, non-bailable warrants, recording reasons,
indicative of committing the accused to prison only, even in that case, the
subordinate Court, before whom the accused is produced or appears in response to
warrant so issued, will have no option but to commit such accused to prison. The
sessions Court, however, can exercise its judicial discretion when the High Court in
its order has not indicated either way to commit the accused to prison or to admit
him to bail pending the disposal of the Appeal. In other words, if the High Court, in
its order merely directs initiation of action under Section 390 of the Code and if the
accused is produced before the subordinate Court, it would be open to the
subordinate Court, after taking into account all aspects of the matter, either to admit
the accused to bail on such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, keeping in mind
that the same are essential to secure the presence of the accused when required in the
pending Appeal or to commit him to prison. That judicial discretion has to be
exercised on the basis of settled parameters, inter-alia, keeping in mind the question,
as to whether releasing the accused on bail would hamper securing his attendance
pending the disposal of the Appeal, in the High Court.
67. The Apex Court in the case of State of U.P. Vs. Poosu and another31, has observed that it is not
possible to computerize and reduce into immutable formula the diverse considerations on the basis
of which this discretion must be exercised. By way of illustration, the Apex Court has referred to
factors such as, the nature and seriousness of the offence, the character of the evidence, interest of
the public and the State. The High Court, while issuing a bailable or non-bailable warrant, also has
to take into consideration the period during which the proceedings against the accused were
pending in the Court below and the period which is likely to elapse before the Appeal comes up for
final hearing in the High Court. The Apex Court has noted that directing rearrest of the accused even
when the Appeal against acquittal is still pending for disposal or committing the accused to prison,
does not in any way offend Article 21 or any other Fundamental Right guaranteed in Part III of the
Constitution of India, for, it does not deprive the accused of his liberty in a manner otherwise than
in accordance with the procedure established by Law."
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
25

68. With regard to question No.2, the learned A.G.A. has pointed out another paragraph of the
judgement referred to hereinabove, namely Balakrishna Mahadev Lad 37, where it was observed: -
"We are of the considered opinion that Section 390 of the Court cannot be read to
mean that the Sessions Judge, on production of the accused, has no option but to
immediately release him on bail. Instead, we hold that the subordinate Court before
whom the accused is produced first with regard to the warrant issued in terms of the
order of the High Court, must exercise its judicial discretion on case to case basis and
in particular keeping in mind, the order of the High Court, passed in the pending
Appeal against acquittal in that regard. This would pre-suppose that the Sessions
Judge, in an appropriate case, can commit the accused to prison till the disposal of
the Appeal. Indeed, in that case, it will be open to the accused to question the
decision of the Sessions Judge before the High Court, in which proceedings the High
Court may consider the claim of the accused for grant of Bail. Thus understood, grant
of bail by the subordinate Court is not a matter of right."
69. With regard to question No.3, as referred to us, Sri Verma has argued that it would be
appropriate to refer to Section 386 of the Cr.P.C. 1973, which talks about the powers of the Appellate
Court, which is being reproduced hereunder: -
"Section 386, powers of the Appellate Court:-
"After perusing, such record and hearing the appellant or his pleader, if he appears,
and the public prosecutor, if he appears, and in the case of an Appeal under Section
377 or Section 378, the accused, if he appears, the Court may, if it considers that
there is no sufficient ground for interfering, dismiss the Appeal or may -
a. In an Appeal from an order of acquittal reverse such order and direct that further
enquiry be made, or that the accused be retried or committed for trial, as the case,
maybe, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him according to Law;
b. In an Appeal from a conviction -
(i) Reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order
him to be retried by a Court of competent jurisdiction, subordinate to such appellate
Court or commit for trial, or
(ii) Alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or
(iii) Without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, of the sentence, but
not so as to enhance the same;
c. In an Appeal for enhancement of sentence,
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
26

(i) Reverse the finding and sentence and acquit, or discharge the accused, or order him to be retried
by a Court competent to try the offence,
(ii) Alter the finding maintaining the sentence,
(iii) With or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent of the sentence, so as to
enhance or reduce the same.
d. In an Appeal from any other order, alter, or reverse such order;
e. Make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper:
Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced, unless the accused has had an
opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement:
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the
offence which in its opinion, the accused has committed, than might have been
inflicted for that offence by the Court, passing the order or sentence under the
Appeal.
70. Sri Umesh Verma has argued that from a perusal of Section 386 of the Code, it is clear that while
hearing the Appeal, the power of the High Court is very wide and there is no express/specific bar
regarding the extent of such power, but as a matter of judicial discipline and propriety, the Appellate
Court cannot assume extraordinary original criminal jurisdiction, not conferred in it while hearing
the Criminal Appeal, as it affects the vital and valuable rights of the parties in such a manner which
would cause serious injustice to them.
71. Sri Verma has pointed out that Under Chapter XVIII of the Allahabad High Court Rules, 1952,
Part D, Rule 10 and Rule 11 deal with ordinary Criminal Jurisdiction of the Court other than that of
Trials.
72. It has been argued by Sri Verma that the hearing of matters before Division Benches of the High
Court are strictly done in accordance with the Rules governing allocation of business/roster
allocation under Allahabad High Court Rules 1952, and if a particular subject matter is allocated to a
particular Bench, the same must be heard and decided by that particular Bench, and not by any
other Bench, and therefore, if cognizance of any matter is taken by a Bench to which the matter is
not allocated by the Hon'ble Chief Justice, the order passed by that Bench would be in excess or in
absence of jurisdiction and liable to be treated as a nullity.
73. It has been submitted by the learned counsel that the orders dated 18.01.2024 and 19.01.2024 at
Allahabad have been passed as general directions by a Division Bench sitting in Criminal Appeal
jurisdiction and, therefore, in excess of and in the absence of jurisdiction allocated to it by the Chief
Justice.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
27

74. It has also been argued that not only did the Division Bench at Allahabad exercise jurisdiction
which was not vested in it by way of allocation of roster by the Chief Justice, it has passed orders
which are without jurisdiction as the directions amount to taking away the discretion vested in the
Magistrate under Cr.P.C. to grant or not to grant bail in serious offences.
There is a distinction between exercise of jurisdiction and existence of jurisdiction. Both are
fundamentally different. Consequences of failure to comply with statutory requirements in the
assumption and in the exercise of jurisdiction may render a decision a nullity in law. The authority
to decide a cause at all and not the decision rendered therein, is what makes up jurisdiction and
when there is jurisdiction of the person and subject matter, the decision of all other questions
arising in the case shall be treated as an exercise of the jurisdiction.
75. In the matter of Kiran Singh Vs. Chaman Paswan, AIR 1954 Supreme Court 340, the Court
observed that a defect of jurisdiction - - - strikes at the very authority of the Court to pass any decree
and such a defect cannot be cured even by the consent of parties." The Division Bench at Allahabad
was hearing a Criminal Appeal and had particularly limited jurisdiction of subject matter. It was
considering the bail application during pendency of the Appeal and as such, there was no occasion
for the Division Bench at Allahabad to travel beyond the subject matter, and also to pass directions
on issues which were not there for its determination.
76. The Division Bench at Allahabad possibly invoked its jurisdiction conferred under Article 226,
along with Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. Its directions were strictly not in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 378, 386 and 390 of the Cr.P.C..
Invoking jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution read with Section 482 of Cr.P.C. for
issuing directions while sitting in Criminal Appeal jurisdiction was beyond the scope of jurisdiction
of the Division Bench at Allahabad.
77. Shri Verma has pointed out that the directions that were issued by the Division Bench at
Allahabad were without noticing the rights of the victims recognized by way of an Amendment to
Section 372 with effect from 31.12.2009. A Court while hearing the bail application in a particular
case does not have enough information as to issue a general mandatory direction which can have the
potential to cause great harm to victims in appeals against conviction, or even appeals against a
acquittal without them being afforded an actual and meaningful opportunity to place their case. In
State of Punjab Vs. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar and others 38, the High Court after deciding the
Appeal continued to pass orders with respect to other offenders in unconnected matters, and the
Supreme Court observed that such invocation of jurisdiction outside the purview of the main case
was unjust. It observed "an inherent power is not an omnibus power for opening a Pandora's box,
that too for issues that are foreign to the main context. The invoking of power has to be for a
purpose that is connected to a proceeding and not for sprouting an altogether new issue. A power
cannot exceed its own authority beyond its own creation. - -."
78. Such directions as have been issued by the Division Bench at Allahabad not only have
far-reaching consequences on the administration of Justice, but also on the State Exchequer as the
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
28

Division Bench had directed payment of costs /compensation to such prisoners who were put
behind the bars on the orders of the Court during the pendency of the Appeal.
79. The learned A.G.A. has pointed out that the answer to the question No.4 lies in Chapter VI of the
Cr.P.C., wherein the Forms as well as the methods for securing the presence of the accused is
prescribed. In addition, the Allahabad High Court Rules 1952, also empowered the High Court to
secure presence of the accused through issuance of warrant during the pendency of the Appeal.
Hence, issuing general directions to grant bail cannot be treated to be a sound exercise of power,
and are liable to be set aside as being per in-curium that is having been issued in ignorance of
statutory provisions as given under Chapter VI of the Cr.P.C., but also in ignorance of the
observations made by the Constitution Bench in the case of State of U.P. Vs. Poosu and another 31.
80. Sri Verma, while answering question No.5 has referred to a judgement rendered by the Supreme
Court in the case of Krishna Kumar Vs. State of U.P. in Criminal Appeal No.3757 of 2023 decided on
01.12.2023. It was observed by the Supreme Court that: -
"This Court has repeatedly taken the view that in a given case where an unwarranted
adjournment is sought by the Advocate representing the accused in the Appeal
against conviction, the Court has an option of appointing an Amicus Curiae to
espouse the cause of the accused and hearing the Appeal on merits. The said course
should have been adopted by the High Court."
81. It has been argued by Sri Umesh Verma, learned A.G.A.-1 that there are four types of criminal
trials in the Cr.P.C. 1973. Firstly, under Chapter 18, trial before a Court of Sessions is dealt with
under Sections 225 to 237. Then under Chapter 19, Trial of warrant cases by Magistrate has been
provided for in Sections 238 to 250. Likewise, under Chapter 20 Trial of Summons cases by
Magistrate is provided under Sections 251 to 259, and under Chapter 21, summary trial cases are
provided for in Sections 260 to 265.
"Summons cases" and "warrant cases" have been defined under Section 2 of the Code
as under -
2(w) Summons case means a case relating to an offence, not being a warrant case;
2(x) Warrant case means a case related to an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years.
It has been argued that if we take into account the definition of Summons case and a
Warrant case, it is evident that every Sessions Trial is a Warrant case and in case of
acquittal when the Appeal is preferred by the State against the order of Sessions
Judge, acquitting the accused persons, after the leave required under Section 378
sub-clause (3) is granted, a warrant of arrest is issued in terms of Section 390 Cr.P.C.
by the High Court. It is a general practice adopted in the Allahabad High Court that
at the first instance in an Appeal against the acquittal, bailable warrants are issued
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
29

with a direction to the concerned Court to release the accused on filing of his personal
bond and two sureties of the like amount to the satisfaction of the Court concerned,
and only in a given case under compelling circumstances when the process of
issuance of bailable warrant is being deliberately not complied with, and the orders
passed by the High Court come to be frustrated, then the High Court to ensure the
presence of the respondent, issues non-bailable warrant against the respondent and
as such to that extent, the provision of Section 390 Cr.P.C. appears to be in tune with
the scheme of the Cr.P.C. because after admission of an Appeal against acquittal and
issuance of warrant/ non bailable warrant the status of the accused is restored as an
accused of a warrant trial case as postulated in the judgement rendered by the
Supreme Court in the case of State of Vs. Poosu and another 31.
82. Sri Verma has also drawn the attention of this Court to the First Schedule appended to the
Cr.P.C., describing the Section, offence and punishment provided under the I.P.C. The table
describes whether offence is cognizable or non-cognizable and whether bailable or non-bailable and
also by what Court the offence is triable. It has also been argued that on the basis of classification of
offences under the First Schedule and the Second Schedule of the Cr.P.C., it is abundantly clear that
the offence under the I.P.C. or under any other laws for which punishment is of more than seven
years or imprisonment for life or death has been prescribed as cognizable, non-bailable and triable
by the Sessions Court (barring some exceptions like Section 467 I.P.C.). In these cases, normally the
courts of Magistrate including Chief Judicial Magistrate, even at the pre-trial stage, avoid/refuse to
exercise the jurisdiction to grant bail. Similarly, when in a case tried by the Sessions Court acquittal
is recorded, which is challenged before the High Court by the State under Section 378 Cr.P.C. or
challenged by a victim of the offence as prescribed under the amended provision of Section 372
Cr.P.C. and the High Court while entertaining the Appeal, after considering the facts and
circumstances, is satisfied with the merits of that particular case admits the Appeal and directs for
issuance of warrant of arrest against the accused/respondents in the light of the provisions of
Section 390 Cr.P.C., it may also issue direction to the Magistrate to grant bail on certain terms
prescribed in the order itself, and the concerned Court or the Magistrate is left with no option except
to comply with the terms of the order issued by the High Court.
83. It has also been argued by Sri Umesh Verma that in certain special Statutes like the Schedule
Caste and Schedule Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989, after an amendment was notified
with the effect from 26.01.2016, and in another special Statute, namely National Investigation
Agency Act, 2008, there is a provision for creation of special and exclusive jurisdiction in Special
Courts and further a provision for special procedure for filing an Appeal from any judgement,
sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, to the High Court, both on facts and on law. The
distinction of an Appeal against a conviction or acquittal has been done away with in these special
statues and as such either an accused aggrieved from an order of conviction or the State or
victim/complainant, as the case maybe, feeling aggrieved by the order of a trial Court, may prefer an
Appeal to the High Court under Section 14 A of the S.C./S.T. Act 1989 or under Section 21 of the
National Investigating Agency Act 2008. Similarly, Special Courts for dealing with cases of
M.P./M.L.A. have been created under the orders of the Supreme Court passed in a P.I.L. The special
provisions regarding power and juridiction of a Special Court where a procedure is prescribed for
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
30

treatment of the accused and the victim in the said special statutes, does require consideration while
deciding issues involved in the instant Reference and answering the questions referred to this Full
Bench.
84. Sri Umesh Verma has also drawn this Court's attention to the powers of the Appellate Court
provided under Section 386 of the Cr.P.C.
It has been argued on the basis of Section 386 Cr.P.C. that it requires the presence of the appellant
or a pleader/Advocate at the time of hearing of the Appeal and in case at the time of hearing of the
Appeal, the appellant or his pleader does not appear to assist the Court in hearing of the Appeal the
Appellate Court is empowered to issue a bailable or non bailable warrant taking into account the
particular facts and circumstances of a case.
85. Sri Umesh Verma taking a divergent view to the arguments made by several other counsel who
assisted this Court, argued that Chapter VI of the Cr.P.C. provides for process to compel appearance,
and Part B relates to warrant of arrest, which is comprised of Sections 70 to 81. A reading of
Sections 70 to 81 clearly demonstrates that they are made for the help of the Investigating Agency
and the trial Court or Magistrate during the continuation of the investigation and thereafter for the
assistance of the Magistrate or the Trial Court at the stage of trial, where during the course of the
proceeding at various stages, the presence of the accused is necessary. These provisions are not to be
resorted to at the stage of Appeal wherein the accused after a full-fledged trial has either been
convicted or acquitted. Sri Umesh Verma has drawn our attention to the language and text of
various Forms of Warrant appended to the Cr.P.C. after the First and Second Schedule, which make
this abundantly clear.
86. Reference has been made to Form No.2 relating to Sections 70 and 71, Form No.3 relating to
Section 81. It has been argued that Sections 82 and 83 relate to proclamation of attachment of
property of the accused if absconding, and have no application at the stage of hearing of an Appeal
particularly in an Appeal filed against acquittal. Therefore, the directions issued by the Division
Bench of this Court in paragraph 7 (a) and (b) of the judgement and order dated 18.01.2024 in the
case of State of U.P. Vs. Geeta Devi and another, is not in accordance with the scheme of the Code
and contrary to the provisions of special statutes like S.C./S.T. Act, N.I.A. Act and Special Courts
created under them and also in respect of M.P./M.L.A. cases. It also violates the valuable rights of
the victims of S.C./S.T. Act, 1989 and P.O.C.S.O. Act 2012, besides the victims who had been given
an valuable right to prefer an Appeal against acquittal without asking for Leave to Appeal as
provided in proviso to Section 372 Cr.P.C. The directions given in other sub paras, namely (c) and
(d) also appear to be in excess of jurisdiction and have been passed in public interest while the Court
was sitting in Criminal Appeal jurisdiction.
87. It has also been argued by Sri Umesh Verma that a Criminal Appeal is filed in the High Court
against the order of the Sessions Court and not against the order of the C.J.M., the papers relating to
the Criminal Appeal/judgement in the Sessions Trial are preserved in the Court of Sessions and the
CJM has no papers with him to assess the probability of the appellant accused continuing to appear
before the Appellate Court or about his future conduct and his cooperation in the disposal of the
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
31

Appeal and, therefore, he cannot be given the discretion to grant bail in a case where the High Court
has issued non-bailable warrants.
It has been argued that Section 81, 85 and 88 of the Cr.P.C. are meant for under trial prisoner alone.
88. Sri Umesh Verma has placed reliance upon a judgement entered in the case of Amin Khan vs.
State of Rajasthan, where the Appellate Court had issued non-bailable warrant in the first instance
looking into the heinous nature of the crime and also being prima facie dissatisfied with the
judgement of the Trial Court. It has been submitted that if the Appellate Court has passed an order
issuing non-bailable warrants, looking into the nature of the offence committed and the apparent
erroneous judgement of the Trial Court, it would be a travesty of justice to allow the Chief Judicial
Magistrate to grant bail to the accused. It has been emphasized that the C.J.M. can have discretion
to grant bail only during trial under Sections 437 and 439 of the Cr.P.C., but when the Appeal is
before the High Court, he must not be given discretion to grant bail on his own without there being a
specific direction in this regard by the High Court.
89. It has been submitted that sureties submitted under Section 437-A are effective only for a period
of six months and this Section was introduced only because the accused were non-traceable, after
acquittal in most cases by the time the Appeal was filed before the higher Court. The counsel for the
State Respondent has also pointed out Section 390 Cr.P.C. and the judgement rendered in Surya
Baksh Singh. It has been argued that if the operation of the order of conviction is stayed by the
Court on being prima facie satisfied with the the argument of the convicted appellant, then only
because of non-appearance of the Counsel for the Appellant, it would not be proper to issue
non-bailable warrants. It would be on the other hand required that Court should first cancel the bail
order or issue notice to the authorities, and then perhaps on failure of compliance of such orders
and continued non-appearance of the appellant, thus, hampering the disposal of the Appeal, a
non-bailable warrant could be issued. In Surya Baksh Singh, the Supreme Court observed that only
after exhaustion of process under Section 446 of the Cr.P.C., the Court can decide the matter on
merits.
90. It has also been argued by Sri Umesh Verma that an Appeal can be filed against conviction or
against an acquittal or even for enhancement of sentence and under Section 384 and 385. On such
Appeal being filed record should first be summoned. Referring to Sections 384, 385 and 386, the
Supreme Court had in the case of Mallikarjun observed that summoning of records is necessary. It
has also been argued that Section 437 and 439 are only confined to under trials. Also, Section 390
Cr.P.C. is applicable only at the stage of admission of the Appeal. Under Section 389, the convicting
Court can release on bail and on furnishing sureties, but such sureties are only for a limited period.
91. Shri Verma has placed reliance upon judgement rendered in Laxman Das Vs. Resham Chand
Kalia and another 39, and paragraph 24 thereof to argue that the High Court cannot command the
Trial Court to grant bail and, thus, breach the independence of the Trial Court.
92. Sri Verma has buttressed his argument regarding the power of this High Court under Section
390 Cr.P.C. to suspend the order of acquittal or discharge passed by the Trial Court. He has referred
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
32

to paragraph 11 of the judgement rendered in State of Maharashtra Vs. Mahesh Kariman Tirky and
others 40, where the Supreme Court in para-11 observed that "it is not in dispute that even
considering Section 390 Cr.P.C. and the decision of this Court in the State of U.P. Vs. Poosu 31, the
Court in Appeal against acquittal may/can even suspend the order of acquittal/discharge passed by
the Appellate Court...."
The principles may be said to be settled, the difficulty very often arises in their applicability. No two
cases are alike. As stated by Lord Viscount Simon in 1952 (1) AER 1044 :-
"it must be remembered that every case is decided on its own facts, and expressions
used, or even principles stated, when the Court is considering particular facts, cannot
always be applied as if they were absolute rules applicable in all circumstances."
93. Sri Verma has placed reliance upon paragraphs 355, 356, and 357 of the judgement rendered in
Laxman Das Chagan Lal Bhatia and others Vs. State by the High Court of Bombay 41, which are as
follows:
"355. - - - after filing the Appeal, he obtained bail from this Court. Within a short
time, thereafter, he not only jumped bail, but has run away from this country and he
is no longer subject to the process of this Court. The question is how his Appeal
should be dealt with.
"356. It is against all reason that this Court should be compelled to hear the Appeal
on merits, even though the accused has, after obtaining bail removed himself out of
the jurisdiction of this Court. If that was so, he would take a chance of success in the
Appeal and return to the country triumphant if his Appeal is allowed, but if his
Appeal is dismissed, he would say he cares little for the orders of the Court. Unless,
therefore, there is any obligation on the Court to hear the Appeal, the Court would be
justified in dismissing it only on this ground.
"357. Section 423 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code 1998 deals with the powers of
the Court to dispose of an Appeal after it is admitted. It requires the Court to decide
after perusing the record and hearing the appellant or his pleader if he appears. This
Section would suggest, therefore, that even if the appellant does not appear to argue
his Appeal, the Court ought to hear the Appeal on merits. It is because of this
wording, that it has been held in a large number of cases that merely because the
appellant does not appear, his Appeal cannot be dismissed for default. Even so, the
principle of this Section cannot apply to the case of An appellant, who has obtained
bail and jumped bail. Along with the Section must be read Section 561A, which
speaks of the inherent power of the High Court to make such orders as maybe
necessary to give effect to any order under the Code, how to prevent abuse of the
process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It is undoubtedly an
abuse of the process of this Court to obtain bail and then to leave its jurisdiction and
render it impossible to enforce its orders. In as much as the other provisions of the
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
33

Code do not limit this power of the High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of
the Court, in our view, we will be justified in refusing to hear the Appeal on merits
and dismiss it in Limine. In this connection, it may be noticed that the practice of the
Court of Criminal Appeal in England, where the appellant escapes from prison and is
not present at the hearing of the Appeal, is either to Adjourn the Appeal or to dismiss
it according to the justice of the case. (See 1965 (3) AER 669) no doubt the English
practice cannot have relevance when we have to construct the Code of Criminal
Procedure. We have referred to it only to show that there can be no injustice in
dismissing an Appeal, where the appellant has jumped bail and does not appear in
Court. In the result, Appeal No. 625 of 1963, by accused No. 11 fails and is dismissed."
In Imtiyaz Raza Khan Vs. State of Maharashtra 42, the Supreme Court was considering Article 21
and the right to proper legal representation on the part of the accused lodged in jail. The Court
noted that because the Amicus Curiae does not have the advantage of having a dialogue with the
accused, at times, it seriously hampers the efforts on the part of the Advocates. All such attempts to
facilitate dialogue between the Counsel and his client would further the cause of justice and make
legal aid meaningful. The Supreme Court observed:-
"We, therefore direct all Legal Services Authorities/Committees in every State to
extend similar such facilities in every criminal case, wherever the accused is lodged in
jail.They shall extend the facility of video conferencing between the Counsel on the
one hand and the accused or anybody in the know of the matter on the other, so that
the cause of justice is well served."
94. We have heard learned counsel appearing before us at length and a perusal of the orders dated
18.01.2024 and 19.01.2024 passed by the Division Bench at Allahabad, would reveal that the said
bench was not in agreement with the procedure followed by the Court in the said appeal wherein the
judgment of acquittal passed by the trial court has been challenged, as in the opinion of the division
bench issuance of non-bailable warrants would mean that the police authority will execute them and
produce the concerned person before the High Court. However, in the appeals before the division
bench despite being acquitted by the trial court, the respondents/accused persons were in judicial
custody for more than one year, as they were arrested in execution of non-bailable warrants issued
by the High Court and while considering Section 390 of the Cr.P.C. and the law laid down by the
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court, directed the Director, Judicial Training and Research
Institute, Lucknow to impress upon the Chief Judicial Magistrates of the State to release such
accused persons on bail who have been arrested in execution of non-bailable warrants issued by the
trial court subject to them furnishing bail bonds and an undertaking to appear before the High
Court. Similar directions were given with regard to those appellants who have been arrested in
pursuance of the non-bailable warrants issued against the appellants in appeals preferred against
conviction whorein sentence has been suspended by the High Court. The Division Bench at
Allahabad appears to have passed above-mentioned orders in appeals preferred against acquittal of
the accused persons.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
34

95. The Division Bench at Lucknow appears to be more concerned with the far reaching
consequences of the omnibus directions issued by the Division Bench at Allahabad in the
above-mentioned criminal appeals and also with regard to the jurisdiction of the Magistrate to
release an appellant on bail who has been arrested in execution of non-bailable warrants issued by
the High Court either in appeal against conviction or in appeal against acquittal, exercising powers
contained under Section 437 of the Code of 1973 and also whether general directions of such nature
could have been issued in hearing of a appeal.
96. Now we proceed to consider questions referred to this bench and are of the view that question
nos. 1, 2 and 3 are interconnected and must be considered conjointly, while question no.5 is with
regard to the appointment of Amicus Curiae and should be dealt with separately. However, in our
considered opinion, it is the question no.4 which must be dealt with precedence as all other
questions appears to be emerging out of the same. We for the sake of convenience would deal the
issue separately with regard to the criminal appeals filed against acquittal (U/s 372 and 378 of the
CrPC) and appeal against conviction (U/s 374 CrPC).
Appeal against acquittal
97. In an appeal against acquittal if the same has been filed by the State under Section 378 of the
Code of 1973 and after grant of necessary leave, the Court finds a prima facie case is emerging for
reconsideration seeks presence of the accused, who has been acquitted by the trial court, Section
390 of the Cr.P.C. would come into play, which is being reproduced as under:-
"390. Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal.- When an appeal is presented under
Section 378, the High Court may issue a warrant directing that the accused be
arrested and brought before it or any subordinate Court, and the Court before which
he is brought may commit him to prison pending the disposal of the appeal or admit
him to bail."
98. Section 427 of the Code of 1898 corresponding to Section 390 of the Code of 1973, was
considered in detail by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Poosu (supra) 31 and the issue before the Apex
Court was whether while granting leave or to say Special Leave in certain cases the Court is having
power to issue non-bailable warrants for the arrest of the accused person, who has been acquitted by
the High Court and after in depth analysis of the issue, the Supreme Court was of the view that the
power to cause the arrest and detention of the accused in prison, pending appeal against the order of
acquittal is ancillary and necessary for the effective exercise of jurisdiction in an appeal preferred
against an order of acquittal. The Constitution Bench was also of the view that when the Court is
satisfied that order of acquittal requires interference and process is required to be issued to the
respondent/accused, his status as accused person would revive and his position would be the same
as was before the Trial Court. However, while considering whether the presence of such accused
person should be ensured by issuing bailable or non-bailable warrants, the same was left entirely on
the discretion of the Court. The relevant extract of the observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Poosu (supra) 31 is being reproduced as under:
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
35

"........whether in the circumstances of the case, the attendance of the accused
respondent can be best secured by issuing a bailable warrant or non-bailable warrant
is a matter which rests entirely in the discretion of the Court. Although, the discretion
is exercised judicially, it is not possible to computerise and reduce into immutable
formulae the diverse considerations on the basis of which this discretion is exercised.
Broadly speaking, the Court would take into account the various factors such as, "the
nature and seriousness of the offence, the character of the evidence, circumstances
peculiar to the accused, possibility of his absconding, tampering with evidence, larger
interest of the public and State"-see The State v. Capt. Jagjit Singh(2). In addition,
the Court may also take into consideration the period during which the proceedings
against the accused were pending in the courts below and the period which is likely to
elapse before the appeal comes up for final hearing before this Court. In the context,
it must be remembered that this over-riding discretionary jurisdiction under Article
136 is invoked sparingly, in exceptional cases, where the order of acquittal recorded
by the High Court is perverse or clearly erroneous and results in a gross miscarriage
of justice.
"......... Nor do we (we do not) find any merit in the contention that an order directing
the re-arrest and detention of an accused- respondent who had been acquitted by the
High Court of a capital offence, in any way, offends Article 21 or any other
fundamental right guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution. Such an order is made
by this Court in the exercise of its plenary jurisdiction conferred by Article 136 and
142 of the Constitution. By no stretch of imagination can it be said that such an order
deprives the accused-respondent of his liberty in a manner otherwise than in
accordance with procedure established by law."
99. Thus perusal of above constitution bench judgment rendered in Poosu (supra)31 would reveal
that in an appeal against acquittal, if the same has been preferred by the State and the Court find
substance therein, it may secure the presence of the accused person by either issuing a bailable or
non-bailable warrant as the case may be, depending upon the factual matrix of each case, but the
ratio laid down in Poosu (supra) 31 in our considered opinion may never be construed to read in
terms that a Court issuing process against an accused person acquitted by the trial court or by the
High Court in an appeal preferred must necessarily issue bailable or non-bailable warrants, if his
presence may be secured through any other mode e.g. summons or notice, as the case may be.
100. In our opinion the word 'may' occurred under Section 390 of the Code of 1973 may not be used
as 'must' or 'shall' and in appropriate case the Court may also issue process of summons to procure
the presence of the accused person before it, however, it will be within the discretion of the Court
issuing process to either issue summons, bailable or non bailable warrants and in this regard no
straight jacket formula of universal application may be formulated. Every criminal case is having its
own factual matrix, circumstances and flavour and a decision in the back drop of the specific facts
and circumstances of that case may be taken by the Court, having regard to the peculiarities of that
very case.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
36

101. Having regard to the specific facts and circumstances of a case process of summons, bailable
warrants or even of non-bailable warrants may be issued under Section 390 Cr.P.C. against the
accused persons to procure their presence, however, the Court issuing process would be obliged to
state reasons if it chooses to issue non-bailable warrants, directly.
102. The Bombay High Court in Praneeta Prakash Navage v. State of Maharashtra 28, while
considering Sections 372, 378, 390 of Code of 1973 Cr.P.C. opined as under:-
"16. Thus, apart from inherent power of this Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.,
in case of an appeal against acquittal governed by provision to Section 372 of the
Cr.P.C., the power to order arrest and detention of the respondent accused in prison
pending the final disposal of the appeal or directing his enlargement on bail, will have
to be read as a power ancillary to and necessary for effective exercise of the power of
appeal under the proviso to Section 372 of Cr.P.C. But for the existence of such an
ancillary power, the right conferred by the legislature on the victim to prefer an
appeal against acquittal will become ineffective and redundant. This cannot be the
intention of the legislature.
"17. However, while dealing with the power of issuing warrant and detaining the
respondent accused in prison or enlarging him on bail, this Court will be naturally
bound by the well settled law. One of the foremost considerations while exercising
such power will be that an order of acquittal further strengthens the presumption of
innocence of the accused. As in case of Section 390 of the Cr.P.C., it is not mandatory
that at the time of admitting the appeal that power to arrest should be exercised in
each case. The said power can be exercised at any stage of the appeal against
acquittal. In the appeal under the proviso to Section 372, after appeal is admitted by
this Court, notice of the appeal is required to be issued to the respondent accused.
The question of exercising power as aforesaid, of issuing arrest warrant and detaining
the respondent till disposal of the appeal or enlarging him on bail, will have to be
exercised at appropriate stage after taking into consideration various aspects such as
gravity of the offence, nature of the evidence adduced by the prosecution, background
and criminal antecedents of the respondents, etc. No hard and fast rule can be laid
down in that behalf. If after service of notice of the appeal under the proviso to
Section 372, the respondent accused appears and is represented by an advocate and if
there is an assurance given that the said respondent will appear at the time of final
hearing, this Court can always postpone the action of issuing warrant against the
concerned respondent. If this Court finds that, after service of notice of the appeal,
the respondent does not cause appearance before the Court, at that stage, this Court
can always issue warrant to the respondent and can either direct confinement of the
respondent till disposal of the appeal or the release of the respondent on appropriate
bail. It all depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. Suffice is to say that
such a drastic power need not be exercised in every appeal at the stage of admitting
the appeal, the reason being that in absence of applicability of Section 390, the
exercise of the said power will be under Section 482 of the said Cr.P.C. The law is well
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
37

settled that the power under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. can be exercised sparingly and
in rare cases.
"18. Now, we turn to the next category of appeals under the proviso to Section 372.
The next category is of an order convicting the accused for a lesser offence. It is true
that even in this category of appeals, inherent power as stated above can be exercised
by this Court. However, in case of such appeals, there will be further constraints. If
the accused has already undergone substantial sentence for the lesser offence, it will
be an additional consideration for exercise of power of issuing warrant. If the
respondent accused has preferred an appeal against the order of conviction and if he
is enlarged on bail in such appeal, it is obvious that this Court may not exercise
inherent power in the appeal preferred at the instance of the victim by ordering
warrant to be issued against the respondent and directing his detention in prison.
"19. As far as the third category of appeals against order of imposing inadequate
compensation is concerned, we must note here that the power of issuing warrant and
directing his confinement till the disposal of appeal cannot be exercised as the appeal
is confined only to order granting inadequate compensation.
"20. At this stage, we must add that, in case of all three categories of appeals, there is
always a power conferred on this Court under Chapter VI of the Cr.P.C. to issue
process for compelling the appearance of the respondent before the Court. We may
hasten to add that the power under Chapter VI is of compelling the appearance
before the Court and the said power is not a power to confine the respondent in
custody till the disposal of the appeal. Therefore, all these three categories of appeal,
if this Court finds that after service of notice appeal of the victim, the respondent has
not caused appearance or after service of notice, respondent accused fails to appear,
the Court can always take recourse to provisions of Chapter VI for procuring and
compelling presence of the respondent accused before this Court.
"23. Considering the peculiar nature of the appeal under proviso to Section 372 of
Cr.P.C., even if there is no specific direction by this Court while admitting the appeal
to issue notice, it is obvious that notice of appeal will have to be served upon the
respondent accused. After service of notice, the Registry will have to place such
appeals before the concerned Court so that Court can ascertain whether the
respondent accused has caused the appearance in the appeal on the basis of the
notice of the appeal. If the Court finds that notwithstanding service of notice, the
respondent has not caused appearance, this Court can always take action as we had
discussed in earlier part of the judgment."
103. The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court was of the view that in an appeal against
acquittal or conviction under Section 378 or 374 of the Code of 1973 as the case may be, process
under Chapter VI of the Code may be issued to compel the appearance of the accused before the
Court, except in appeal against conviction in a lesser offence or appeal against inadequate
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
38

compensation as the convict/ accused himself might have challenged the judgment and order of
conviction by filing an appeal under Section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and might have
been released on bail by the appellate court., during the pendency of such appeal.
104. At this juncture it is also worthwhile to discuss the law propounded by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in State of Maharashtra Vs. Mahesh Kariman Tirki, (2022)10 SCC 207 has opined as under:
"11. It cannot be disputed and it is not in dispute that even considering Section 390
Cr.P.C. and the decision of this Court in State of U.P. v. Poosu [State of U.P. v. Poosu,
(1976) 3 SCC 1 : 1976 SCC (Cri) 368] , the appellate court in an appeal against
acquittal may/can even suspend the order of acquittal/discharge passed by the
appellate court. Therefore, it is not disputed that this Court can suspend the
judgment and order passed by the High Court acquitting/discharging the accused."
105. The Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in Balkrishna Mahadev Lad V. State of Maharashtra
37 while considering the same issue, has opined as under:-
"5.Notably, the above said observations have been made without referring to the legal
position expounded by the Apex Court in the case of Poosu (supra). Indubitably, a
person who is acquitted of the criminal charges, by a Court of law, should not remain
in jail even for a day after acquittal. But, that does not necessarily follow that the
subordinate Court, before whom the acquitted accused is produced, in connection
with the order passed by the High Court in an appeal against his acquittal, cannot
commit him to prison even if the fact situation so warrants.
"8. A bare perusal of this provision leaves no manner of doubt that the High Court is
expected to exercise its judicial discretion on case to case basis to issue a warrant
(bailable or non-bailable) directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it
or be produced before the subordinate Court for compliance thereof. The opening
part of this section makes it amply clear that (he judicial discretion can be exercised
at any stage, after the presentation of the appeal under section 378 of the Code. Thus,
presentation of such appeal is a sine qua non for exercise of this judicial discretion, in
terms of section 390 of the Code."
106. In this regard the ratio settled by the Honb'le Supreme Court in Inder Mohan Goswami Vs.
State of Uttaranchal 3 may be recalled wherein certain directions have been issued by the Apex
Court in following paragraphs:-
"53. Non-bailable warrant should be issued to bring a person to court when summons
or bailable warrants would be unlikely to have the desired result. This could be when:
 it is reasonable to believe that the person will not voluntarily appear in court; or 
the police authorities are unable to find the person to serve him with a summon; or 
it is considered that the person could harm someone if not placed into custody
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
39

immediately.
"54. As far as possible, if the court is of the opinion that a summon will suffice in
getting the appearance of the accused in the court, the summon or the bailable
warrants should be preferred. The warrants either bailable or non-bailable should
never be issued without proper scrutiny of facts and complete application of mind,
due to the extremely serious consequences and ramifications which ensue on
issuance of warrants. The court must very carefully examine whether the criminal
complaint or FIR has not been filed with an oblique motive.
"55. In complaint cases, at the first instance, the court should direct serving of the
summons along with the copy of the complaint. If the accused seem to be avoiding
the summons, the court, in the second instance should issue bailable warrant. In the
third instance, when the court is fully satisfied that the accused is avoiding the court's
proceeding intentionally, the process of issuance of the non-bailable warrant should
be resorted to. Personal liberty is paramount, therefore, we caution courts at the first
and second instance to refrain from issuing non-bailable warrants."
107. In Raghuvansh Dewanchand Bhasin Vs. State of Maharashtra 2, the Supreme Court placing
reliance upon Inder Mohan Gowswami 3 observed that:-
"13. We deferentially concur with these directions, and emphasise that since these
directions flow from the right to life and personal liberty, enshrined in Articles 21 and
22(1) of our Constitution, they need to be strictly complied with. However, we may
hasten to add that these are only broad guidelines and not rigid rules of universal
application when facts and behavioural patterns are bound to differ from case to case.
Since discretion in this behalf is entrusted with the court, it is not advisable to lay
down immutable formulae on the basis whereof discretion could be exercised. As
aforesaid, it is for the court concerned to assess the situation and exercise discretion
judiciously, dispassionately and without prejudice. Viewed in this perspective, we
regret to note that in the present case, having regard to nature of the complaint
against the appellant and his stature in the community and the fact that admittedly
the appellant was regularly attending the court proceedings, it was not a fit case
where non-bailable warrant should have been issued by the Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate. In our opinion, the attendance of the appellant could have
been secured by issuing summons or at best by a bailable warrant. We are, therefore,
in complete agreement with the High Court that in the facts and circumstances of the
case, issuance of non-bailable warrant was manifestly unjustified."
108. Keeping in view the legal position discussed above, and in view of the Constitution Bench
Judgment of Poosu (supra) 31 which is holding the field till today, depending upon the specific
factual matrix of each case, in an appeal against acquittal, suitable process even of the nature of
bailable or non-bailable warrants may be issued by the Court while securing the presence of accused
persons under Section 390 Cr.P.C. and issuance of process (summons, bailable or non bailable
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
40

warrants) would be the discretion of the Court.
Appeal against conviction
109. Section 374 of the Code of 1973 governs Appeal against the conviction and it says that an
Appeal against conviction may be preferred either to the Sessions Court or High Court in the
manner suggested therein.
110. In an Appeal against conviction generally the convicted appellant is already detained in prison
unless he has been released on interim bail by the convicting court under Section 389(3) of the Code
of 1973 and even in that case he would be required to obtain regular bail from the appellate court as
he has only been released on interim bail by the convicting court only for the purpose of filing an
appeal.
111. In both cases when an appellant is released on bail by the High Court, the custody of the convict
is entrusted to his sureties. Here we are only concerned with those convict appellants who have been
released on bail by this Court as the question we are considering relates to the course to be
ordinarily adopted by the this Court for securing presence of a convict appellant who has been
released on bail on default of his counsel to facilitate hearing of appeal filed by him.
112. Generally, the appeals against convictions, wherein the convict has been granted bail are listed
with some amount of delay, especially the appeals pertaining to the Division Benches where the
preparation of the paper book is also obligatory, having regard to the provision contained under
Allahabad High Court Rules and when these appeals are listed the counsel for the appellant/ convict
are generally not present and it is in the quest of providing an opportunity of being heard to the
appellant coercive process of the nature of bailable or non-bailable warrants is issued by the High
Court.
113. It is important to remember that Apex Court in Bani Singh Vs. State of U.P. 11 has emphasized
the need of disposing criminal appeals on merits after hearing the counsel of the appellant or
appellant himself and when the counsel for the appellant intentionally or unintentionally is not
appearing in Court, the necessity of the presence of the appellant emerges to provide an opportunity
of being heard to him. This view has been reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
K.S. Panduranga 13 and Surya Bux Singh 12. In view of the law laid down in these cases it had been
settled that a criminal appeal, which has been admitted for hearing should not be dismissed for
default or for non prosecution and should only be decided on merits and an opportunity for hearing
would be provided to either appellant convict or to his counsel.
114. Now, the question, which stares us in the face, is as to what process be adopted against a convict
appellant who is not represented by his counsel when his appeal is taken up by the Court for hearing
and he has been released on bail by this Court. We may recall that in view of the law laid down in
above cases in absence of his counsel opportunity of being heard is required to be provided to the
appellant.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
41

115. We may take cognizance of the fact that at High Court while releasing a convict on bail after
suspending his sentence generally no condition is imposed on him to remain personally present
before this court, unlike District Courts where a condition to remain personally present before the
trial court or appellate court is generally placed on the appellant. In the absence of such a condition
an appellant/ convict is not obliged to remain personally present before this Court on each and
every date when his appeal is due to be taken up for hearing. In this scenario in the considered
opinion of this Court in absence of any such condition in his bail order, the appellant may not be
penalized for the default committed by his counsel.
116. Thus, if this Court requires personal presence of the convict/ appellant in order to provide him
an opportunity of being heard as highlighted by the Apex Court in Bani Singh 11 , Surya Bux Singh
12 and K. S. Panduranga 13, a bailable warrant initially is required to be issued to such a convict
appellant for his presence before this Court either to argue his case personally or to engage another
counsel of his choice, but in our considered opinion at the outset without issuing a bailable warrant
initially, a non-bailable warrant may not be issued against him.
117. We may reiterate that the personal liberty of a person could only be curtailed strictly in
accordance with the procedure established by law and not otherwise. Hence, in absence of counsel
of the appellant in an appeal against conviction wherein the appellant has been released on bail, no
warrant of arrest straightway could be issued for the presence of the appellant. Of course if such
appellant, even after bailable warrant is issued is deliberately avoiding his appearance before the
court, in that scenario suitable process even of the nature of non-bailable warrants or process under
Sections 82 and 83 Cr.P.C. against property of the accused or under Section 446 of the Code of 1973
may be issued against him and his sureties.
It is clarified, at this juncture, that the court by virtue of power conferred under Section 439 (2) of
the Code can also cancel the bail granted to an appellant if the situation so warrants, but on default
of of his counsel non-bailable warrants straight away may not be issued against him.
118. Thus we answer the question no.4 in terms that having regard to the law propounded in Poosu
(supra) 31 in an appeal against acquittal in an appropriate case coercive process even of the nature
of bailable warrants or non-bailable warrants may be issued against the accused having regard to
the peculiar facts and circumstances of such case, but it may not be construed that in all appeals
against acquittal while summoning a person warrants would invariably be issued as in suitable
cases, in the discretion of the Court summons may also be issued. However, in an appeal against
conviction wherein an appellant has already been released on bail and his counsel has not appeared
for arguing the appeal. Generally, no warrant of arrest could be straightaway issued against him and
bailable warrants at the first instance must be issued against such convict appellant for the reason
that he has already been released on bail by the court and no condition of his personal presence on
each day of hearing has been imposed on him. Thus the question no.4 is answered accordingly.
119. Now, we shall consider Question Nos.1, 2 & 3 as under:-
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
42

While answering question no.4, we have already answered that in an appeal against
acquittal while summoning the accused person under Section 390 Cr.P.C. coercive
process even of the nature of bailable warrant or non-bailable warrant may be issued
against the appellant having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of each
case but it may not be construed to mean that in each and every appeal against
acquittal the accused person must be summoned in variably by issuing bailable or
non-bailable warrants and in an appropriate case summons may also be issued and in
appeal against conviction wherein an appellant has already been released on bail and
his counsel is not appearing for arguing the appeal no warrant of arrest could be
issued straightaway against him and only bailable warrant be issued at the first
instance to ensure his representation.
120. We shall now deal with a situation where non-bailable warrants have been issued against an
appellant in appeal against conviction or against accused person in appeal against acquittal, and as
to whether such accused person or appellant against whom non-bailable warrants have been issued
by this court, may be released on bail by the District Court or the Chief Judicial Magistrate
concerned without any such stipulation occuring in the order of the High Court.
121. The Full Bench of Bombay High Court in Balkrishna Mahadev Lad 37 has held as under:-
"....... when an accused is acquitted by the subordinate Court, after a full-fledged trial,
the High Court, while issuing direction in exercise of powers under section 390 of the
Code, may, in a given case, issue "bailable warrants" directing production of the
accused before it or the subordinate Court for compliance thereof. If the accused is
produced before the subordinate Court, pursuant to such "bailable warrants" issued
by the High Court, the subordinate Court may release that accused on bail on terms
and conditions which must be just and proper to secure the presence of the accused.
Indeed, if the accused is unable to fulfil the terms and conditions for release on bail,
the subordinate Court will be justified in directing committal of the accused to prison.
However, he must soon thereafter intimate that fact to the High Court.
Notwithstanding the power given to the subordinate Court under section 390 of the
Code, it cannot direct that the accused be committed to prison even if he is capable of
and willing to abide by the terms and conditions of bail. Further, if the High Court in
its order issuing "bailable warrants" has already spelt out the terms and conditions
then the subordinate Court cannot add to or relax such conditions, but is expected to
ensure compliance of those directions of the High Court.
"10. Similarly, if the High Court were to issue "non-bailable warrants" recording
reasons indicative of committing the accused to prison only, even in that case, the
subordinate Court, before whom the accused is produced or appears in response to
warrant so issued, will have no option but to commit such accused to prison.
"11. The Sessions Court, however, can exercise its judicial discretion when the High
Court in its order has not indicated either way to commit the accused to prison or to
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
43

admit him to bail, pending the disposal of the appeal. In other words, if the High
Court, in its order, merely directs initiation of action under section 390 of the Code
and if the accused is produced before the subordinate Court, it would be open to the
subordinate Court, after taking into account all aspects of the matter, either to admit
the accused to bail on such terms and conditions as it may be deem fit keeping in
mind that the same are essential to secure the presence of the accused when required
in the pending appeal or to commit him to prison. That judicial discretion has to be
exercised on the basis of settled parameters and, inter alia, keeping in mind the
question, as to whether releasing the accused on bail would not hamper securing his
attendance pending the disposal of the appeal against acquittal in the High Court.
***** "13. We are of the considered opinion that section 390 of the Code cannot be
read to mean that the Sessions Judge, on production of the accused, has no option
but to immediately release him on bail. Instead, we hold that the subordinate Court
before whom the accused is produced pursuant to warrant issued in terms of order of
the High Court, must exercise his judicial discretion on case to case basis and in
particular keeping in mind the order of the High Court, passed in the pending appeal
against acquittal in that regard. This would presuppose that the Sessions Judge, in
appropriate case, can commit the accused to prison till the disposal of the appeal.
Indeed, in that case, it will be open to the accused to question that decision of the
Sessions Judge, before the High Court, in which proceedings, the High Court may
consider the claim of the accused for grant of bail. Thus understood, grant of bail by
the subordinate Court is not a matter of right."
(emphasis supplied)
122. The general provisions of bail contained under Section 437 and 439 of the Code of 1973 are with
regard to the grant of bail during the course of trial and suspension of sentence and consequential
release of the convict on bail is enshrined under Section 389 of the Code of 1973 after his conviction
by the trial court and on an appeal filed by such convict, the presence of the appellant accused is
required. In appeal against acquittal if after finding substance in the appeal it is admitted or, if
necessary, leave is granted and accused person acquitted by the trial court is summoned under
Section 390 of the Code of 1973 to remain present before the appellate court and in appropriate
cases even judgment of acquittal may be suspended.
123. It is clarified that in Code of 1973 no such nomenclature has been given as bailable or
non-bailable warrants. Section 70 and 71 of the Cr.P.C. enshrined in Chapter VI of the Code of 1973
deals with the issuance of process and keeping in view the above mentioned provision it would only
be the endorsement made on the warrant of arrest which could label it as either bailable or
non-bailable warrant. Section 70 and 71 of Code of 1973, which appears to be relevent is reproduced
as under:-
"70. Form of warrant of arrest and duration.--(1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a
Court under this Code shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of such
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
44

Court and shall bear the seal of the Court.
(2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which
issued it, or until it is executed.
"71. Power to direct security to be taken.--(1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the
arrest of any person may in its discretion direct by endorsement on the warrant that,
if such person executes a bond with sufficient sureties for his attendance before the
Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise directed by the Court, the
officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security and shall release such
person from custody.
(2) The endorsement shall state--
(a) the number of sureties;
(b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is issued,
are to be respectively bound;
(c) the time at which he is to attend before the Court. (3) Whenever security is taken
under this section, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall forward the bond
to the Court."
124. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Raghuvansh Dewanchand Bhasin Vs. State of Maharashtra 2, has
noticed this distinction in paragraphs no. 25, 26 of the report, the same are reproduced as under:-
"25. It is true that neither Section 70 nor Section 71 appearing in Chapter VI of the
Code enumerating the processes to compel appearance as also Form 2 uses the
expression like "non-bailable". Section 70 merely speaks of form of warrant of arrest,
and ordains that it will remain in force until it is cancelled. Similarly, Section 71 talks
of discretionary power of court to specify about the security to be taken in case the
person is to be released on his arrest pursuant to the execution of the warrant issued
under Section 70 of the Code. Sub-section (2) of Section 71 of the Code specifies the
endorsements which can be made on a warrant. Nevertheless, we feel that the
endorsement of the expression "non-bailable" on a warrant is to facilitate the
executing authority as well as the person against whom the warrant is sought to be
executed to make them aware as to the nature of the warrant that has been issued.
"26. In our view, merely because Form 2, issued under Section 476 of the Code, and
set forth in the Second Schedule, nowhere uses the expression bailable or
non-bailable warrant, that does not prohibit the courts from using the said word or
expression while issuing the warrant or even to make endorsement to that effect on
the warrant so issued. Any endorsement/variation, which is made on such warrant
for the benefit of the person against whom the warrant is issued or the persons who
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
45

are required to execute the warrant, would not render the warrant to be bad in law.
What is material is that there is a power vested in the court to issue a warrant and
that power is to be exercised judiciously depending upon the facts and circumstances
of each case. Being so, merely because the warrant uses the expression like
"non-bailable" and that such terminology is not to be found in either Section 70 or
Section 71 of the Code that by itself cannot render the warrant bad in law. The
argument is devoid of substance and is rejected accordingly."
125. We are of the opinion that under Section 390 of the Code of 1973 the Court may direct that
accused be arrested and brought before it or be produced before the subordinate court (trial court)
for compliance thereof if the accused is arrested in connection with such bailable warrants issued by
the court it would be lawful for the subordinate court to release him on bail and if he fails to comply
with the terms, he may be confined in prison and when the High Court has issued non-bailable
warrant indicating that the accused be committed to prison only, in that case the subordinate court
would have no option but to commit him to custody/ prison.
126. It is further clarified that discretion may only be exercised by the trial court when the High
Court has not indicated in its order either to commit the accused to prison or to admit him to bail, i.
e. where the High Court has simply directed to take action under Section 390 of the Code of 1973.
127. It is clear that where the High Court has consciously issued non-bailable warrant for the
confinement or arrest of an appellant, the intention of issuance of such warrant is to commit the
accused/ appellant or convict to prison and in that condition the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge as
the case may be would have no jurisdiction to release such person on bail. It would be the terms of
the order of the High Court under which non-bailable warrants have been issued which will govern
the fate of the accused or appellant/convict and neither C.J.M. nor Session Judge would have
jurisdiction to release such appellant or accused on bail irrespective of the fact whether the
non-bailable warrant has been issued in an appeal against acquittal or in an appeal against
conviction.
128. However, in case the appellant or accused is arrested and committed to prison as directed by
the High Court, an information to that effect shall be given forthwith to the High Court of the arrest
of such person by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Session Judge concerned.
129. We are also of the considered view that stage of the appeal may not have any bearing on the
discretion of the subordinate court as it would be solely for the High Court to assess the factual
scenario and evidence in order to arrive at a decision as to whether a non-bailable warrant be issued
in a particular case and once the non-bailable warrant has been issued by the High Court, the
subordinate court would be divested of any jurisdiction to release such an appellant or accused
person on bail, unless otherwise directed by the High Court.
130. So far as issuance of bailable warrant is concerned the discretion would always be of the
subordinate court to release such an appellant or accused on bail subject to the condition that he will
appear before the High Court on a particular day indicated by the High Court in its order. Thus
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
46

question nos. 1, 2 and 3 are answered accordingly.
131. Now we shall consider the question no. 5, as under:-
132. Question no. 5, which has been framed by the Division Bench at Lucknow for consideration,
may be broadly categorized in the following sub-heads:-
"(i) whether an appeal against conviction or acquittal can be heard by appointing
amicus for convict/appellants or respondent/accused in appeal against conviction or
in appeal against acquittal, as the case may be, when they are not appearing in court,
without their consent?
(ii) whether such amicus may even be appointed when the presence of a convict or
accused can be secured without his consent and without any intimation to him? If so,
under what circumstances?"
133. To answer Question No. 5, first of all, we have to consider as to whether any appeal against
conviction or acquittal may be heard by appointing amicus when the appellant or accused person, as
the case may be, is not appearing in the court. This issue does not seem to be res integra any more.
134. In the case reported in Hussainara Khatoon Vs. State of Bihar 6, while considering Article 39-A
of the Constitution of India, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in para-7 as under:-
"7. We may also refer to Article 39-A the fundamental constitutional directive which
reads as follows:
"39-A. Equal justice and free legal aid.--The State shall secure that the operation of
the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in
particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other
way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by
reason of economic or other disabilities."
135. In the case reported in (2012) 8 SCC 553 (Rajoo alias Ramakaant Vs. State of M.P.) 1 the
Hon'ble Supreme again emphasized the need of providing fair trial to the accused in following
words.
The Supreme Court noted the constitutional amendment incorporating Article 39-A and also the
promulgation of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 and then observed in paragraph-11 as
follows:-
"11. It is important to note in this context that Sections 12 and 13 of the Act do not
make any distinction between the trial stage and the appellate stage for providing
legal services. In other words, an eligible person is entitled to legal services at any
stage of the proceedings which he or she is prosecuting or defending. In fact the
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
47

Supreme Court Legal Services Committee provides legal assistance to eligible persons
in this Court. This makes it abundantly clear that legal services shall be provided to
an eligible person at all stages of the proceedings, trial as well as appellate. It is also
important to note that in view of the constitutional mandate of Article 39-A, legal
services or legal aid is provided to an eligible person free of cost."
136. Requirement of providing free & fair trial with fair and just procedure has also been highlighted
by the Apex Court in the case reported in Khatri and others Vs. State of Bihar and others 43 and in
the case reported in Suk Das Vs. UT of Arunachal Pradesh 44. In these cases the trial was held
vitiated as legal representation was not provided to the accused persons.
137. In the case reported in Zahira Habibullah Sheikh & Anr vs State Of Gujarat & Ors 8, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has highlighted the importance of fair trial and procedure not only to an accused but
to all stakeholders, including the victim of the crime.
138. Thus, it is well accepted that right to free legal aid or service is an essential ingredient of free &
fair trial and procedure and is implicit under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The trial and
procedure adopted in trial or appeal must reflect and should ensure that innocent persons are
protected and guilty persons are punished.
139. In the case reported in Bani Singh and others Vs. State of U.P. 11, while finding conflict between
the two decisions of the Benches of the same strength i.e. in the cases Shyam Deo Pandey Vs. State
of Bihar 45 and Ram Naresh Yadav Vs. State of Bihar 46, the Supreme Court has resolved the same
in paras 13, 14, 15 and 16 of the report, which are being reproduced herein below:-
"13. What then is the area of conflict between the two decisions of this Court? In
Shyam Deo case [(1971) 1 SCC 855], this Court ruled that once the appellate court has
admitted the appeal to be heard on merits, it cannot dismiss the appeal for
non-prosecution for non-appearance of the appellant or his counsel, but must
dispose of the appeal on merits after examining the record of the case. It next held
that if the appellant or his counsel is absent, the appellate court is not bound to
adjourn the appeal but it can dispose it of on merits after perusing the record. In Ram
Naresh Yadav case [AIR 1987 SC 1500] , the Court did not analyse the relevant
provisions of the Code nor did it notice the view taken in Shyam Deo case [(1971) 1
SCC 855] but held that if the appellant's counsel is absent, the proper course would
be to dismiss the appeal for non-prosecution but not on merits; it can be disposed of
on merits only after hearing the appellant or his counsel or after appointing another
counsel at State cost to argue the case on behalf of the accused.
"14. We have carefully considered the view expressed in the said two decisions of this
Court and, we may state that the view taken in Shyam Deo case [(1971) 1 SCC 855]
appears to be sound except for a minor clarification which we consider necessary to
mention. The plain language of Section 385 makes it clear that if the appellate court
does not consider the appeal fit for summary dismissal, it 'must' call for the record
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
48

and Section 386 mandates that after the record is received, the appellate court may
dispose of the appeal after hearing the accused or his counsel. Therefore, the plain
language of Sections 385-386 does not contemplate dismissal of the appeal for
non-prosecution simpliciter. On the contrary, the Code envisages disposal of the
appeal on merits after perusal and scrutiny of the record. The law clearly expects the
appellate court to dispose of the appeal on merits, not merely by perusing the
reasoning of the trial court in the judgment, but by cross-checking the reasoning with
the evidence on record with a view to satisfying itself that the reasoning and findings
recorded by the trial court are consistent with the material on record. The law,
therefore, does not envisage the dismissal of the appeal for default or
non-prosecution but only contemplates disposal on merits after perusal of the record.
Therefore, with respect, we find it difficult to agree with the suggestion in Ram
Naresh Yadav case [AIR 1987 SC 1500] that if the appellant or his pleader is not
present, the proper course would be to dismiss an appeal for non-prosecution.
"15. Secondly, the law expects the appellate court to give a hearing to the appellant or
his counsel, if he is present, and to the public prosecutor, if he is present, before
disposal of the appeal on merits. Section 385 posits that if the appeal is not dismissed
summarily, the appellate court shall cause notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be heard to be given to the appellant or his pleader. Section 386 then
provides that the appellate court shall, after perusing the record, hear the appellant
or his pleader, if he appears. It will be noticed that Section 385 provides for a notice
of the time and place of hearing of the appeal to be given to either the appellant or his
pleader and not to both presumably because notice to the pleader was also
considered sufficient since he was representing the appellant. So also Section 386
provides for a hearing to be given to the appellant or his lawyer, if he is present, and
both need not be heard. It is the duty of the appellant and his lawyer to remain
present on the appointed day, time and place when the appeal is posted for hearing.
This is the requirement of the Code on a plain reading of Sections 385-386 of the
Code. The law does not enjoin that the court shall adjourn the case if both the
appellant and his lawyer are absent. If the court does so as a matter of prudence or
indulgence, it is a different matter, but it is not bound to adjourn the matter. It can
dispose of the appeal after perusing the record and the judgment of the trial court.
We would, however, hasten to add that if the accused is in jail and cannot, on his
own, come to court, it would be advisable to adjourn the case and fix another date to
facilitate the appearance of the accused/appellant if his lawyer is not present. If the
lawyer is absent, and the court deems it appropriate to appoint a lawyer at State
expense to assist it, there is nothing in the law to preclude it from doing so. We are,
therefore, of the opinion and we say so with respect, that the Division Bench which
decided Ram Naresh Yadav case [AIR 1987 SC 1500] did not apply the provisions of
Sections 385-386 of the Code correctly when it indicated that the appellate court was
under an obligation to adjourn the case to another date if the appellant or his lawyer
remained absent.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
49

"16. Such a view can bring about a stalemate situation. The appellant and his lawyer
can remain absent with impunity, not once but again and again till the court issues a
warrant for the appellant's presence. A complaint to the Bar Council against the
lawyer for non-appearance cannot result in the progress of the appeal. If another
lawyer is appointed at State cost, he too would need the presence of the appellant for
instructions and that would place the court in the same situation. Such a procedure
can, therefore, prove cumbersome and can promote indiscipline. Even if a case is
decided on merits in the absence of the appellant, the higher court can remedy the
situation if there has been a failure of justice. This would apply equally if the accused
is the respondent for the obvious reason that if the appeal cannot be disposed of
without hearing the respondent or his lawyer, the progress of the appeal would be
halted."
(emphasis supplied by us)
140. In the case of Dharam Pal and others Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh47, while considering the issue
of non-representation of appellant before the High Court as his counsel informed that appellant is
not responding to various letters written by him and High Court decided the appeal on merits after
hearing the public prosecutor.
The Supreme Court after noting the provisions of Section 385 and 386 of the Cr.P.C., observed as
under:-
"Having examined the provisions under Sections 385 and 386 of the Code, as noted
hereinabove, and applying the principles laid down by this Court in Bani Singh
[(1996) 4 SCC 720] we are not in agreement with the argument advanced by the
learned counsel for the appellants that the High Court ought not to have decided the
appeal on merits in the absence of the appellants as the High Court had no power or
jurisdiction under Sections 385 or 386 of the Code to do so.
"11. .......Even if we assume that the notice of appeal was not served on the appellants,
then also, it was an admitted position that the learned counsel for the appellants
appeared for them to prosecute the appeal and therefore, after appearance of the
learned counsel for the appellants, it must be held that the notice of appeal was duly
served. At the risk of repetition, we may note that the learned counsel for the
appellants submitted before the High Court that despite repeated reminders to the
appellants, the appellants were not responding and therefore, the learned counsel for
the appellants expressed his inability to argue the case before the High Court.
"13. While dealing with the procedure for disposing of a criminal appeal, this Court in
Bani Singh case [(1996) 4 SCC 720] has clearly laid down that the dismissal of an
appeal for default or non-prosecution without going into the merits of the case is
clearly illegal and that the appellate court must dispose of the appeal on merits after
perusal and scrutiny of record and after giving a hearing to the parties, if present,
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
50

before disposal of the appeal on merits. This Court, in that decision, further held that
the appellate court must dispose of the appeal after perusal of the record and
judgment of the trial court even if the appellant or his counsel was not present at the
time of hearing of the appeal. The only exception, as we find from the aforesaid
decision of this Court, is that if the appellant is in jail and his counsel is not present,
the court should adjourn the case to facilitate the appearance of the appellant.
"14. There is yet another exception to this rule, namely, that in an appropriate case,
the court can appoint a lawyer at the State's expense to assist the court. Therefore,
the High Court, in our view, was justified in taking the assistance of the Assistant
Government Advocate and after taking such assistance and considering the entire
evidence on record, the High Court passed the judgment under appeal before us
holding that the appellants were guilty of the offence, not under Sections 302/34 IPC
but under Section 304 Part II IPC and directed them to undergo 7 years' rigorous
imprisonment. In doing so, the High Court affirmed the findings of the trial court but
differed on the point of the offence committed by the appellants and the
corresponding punishment to be awarded to them."
141. In the case reported in (K. Muruganandam and others v. State Represented by the Deputy
Superintendent of Police and another) 5, while emphasizing the need that a criminal appeal should
not be dismissed for non-prosecution, it was held in para-6 as under:
"6. It is well settled that if the accused does not appear through counsel appointed by
him/her, the Court is obliged to proceed with the hearing of the case only after
appointing an Amicus Curiae, but cannot dismiss the appeal merely because of
non-representation or default of the advocate for the accused (see Kabira v. State of
U.P. [Kabira v. State of U.P., 1981 Supp SCC 76] and Mohd. Sukur Ali v. State of
Assam [Mohd. Sukur Ali v. State of Assam, (2011) 4 SCC 729] )."
142. In the case reported in Kabira Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 32 where an appeal has been
dismissed by the High Court in default of appearance of the appellant a note of caution has been
given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
".......We are, therefore, of the view that there has not been a proper disposal of the
appeal preferred by the appellant. The appeal could not be dismissed by the learned
Judge for default of appearance. If the appellant was not present, the learned Judge
should have appointed some advocate as amicus curiae and then proceeded to
dispose of the appeal on merits. The order dated August 7, 1979 passed by the learned
Judge dismissing the appeal, as also the reasoned judgment bearing the date August
7, 1979 given by the learned Judge must accordingly be set aside."
143. The settled view appears to be that the law expects an appellate court to give hearing to the
appellant or his counsel, if he is present and, also to the public prosecutor before disposal of appeal
on merits as law postulates that if appeal has not been dismissed summarily under section 384 of
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
51

the Code of 1973 the appellate court shall cause notice of time and place, on which the appeal would
be heard, to be notified (under section 385 of Code of 1973) to the appellant or his counsel and also
that law does not enjoin that the appeal be adjourned in absence of appellant (who may be on bail)
or his counsel and the same may be disposed of after perusing the record and judgment of the trial
court. However, an appellant, who is in jail, would have to be given an opportunity to argue the case
himself or to engage some other counsel and in appropriate cases service of counsel at State expense
(Amicus) may also be provided to such an convict or accused.
144. In K.S. Panduranga Vs. State of Karnataka 13, while considering the issue as to whether in
absence of counsel for the appellant the appeal may be decided on merits, without appointing any
amicus and after considering the law laid down in the case of Mohd. Sukur Ali Vs. State of Assam 33,
Bani Singh Vs. State of U.P.11, Ram Naresh Yadav Vs. State of Bihar 46 and Bapu Limbaji Kamble
Vs. State of Maharashtra 36 opined in para-19 (19.1 to 19.6), 20 and 32 as under:-
"19. From the aforesaid decision in Bani Singh [(1996) 4 SCC 720 : 1996 SCC (Cri)
848 : AIR 1996 SC 2439] , the principles that can be culled out are:
19.1. That the High Court cannot dismiss an appeal for non-prosecution simpliciter
without examining the merits;
19.2. That the Court is not bound to adjourn the matter if both the appellant or his
counsel/lawyer are absent;
19.3. That the court may, as a matter of prudence or indulgence, adjourn the matter
but it is not bound to do so;
19.4. That it can dispose of the appeal after perusing the record and judgment of the
trial court;
19.5. That if the accused is in jail and cannot, on his own, come to court, it would be
advisable to adjourn the case and fix another date to facilitate the appearance of the
appellant-accused if his lawyer is not present, and if the lawyer is absent and the
court deems it appropriate to appoint a lawyer at the State expense to assist it,
nothing in law would preclude the court from doing so; and 19.6. That if the case is
decided on merits in the absence of the appellant, the higher court can remedy the
situation.
20. In Bapu Limbaji Kamble [(2005) 11 SCC 413 and Man Singh [(2008) 9 SCC 542],
this Court has not laid down as a principle that it is absolutely impermissible on the
part of the High Court to advert to merits in a criminal appeal in the absence of the
counsel for the appellant.
32. In view of the aforesaid enunciation of law, it can safely be concluded that the
dictum in Mohd. Sukur Ali [(2011) 4 SCC 729] to the effect that the court cannot
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
52

decide a criminal appeal in the absence of the counsel for the accused and that too if
the counsel does not appear deliberately or shows negligence in appearing, being
contrary to the ratio laid down by the larger Bench in Bani Singh [(1996) 4 SCC 720],
is per incuriam. We may hasten to clarify that barring the said aspect, we do not
intend to say anything on the said judgment as far as engagement of amicus curiae or
the decision rendered regard being had to the obtaining factual matrix therein or the
role of the Bar Association or the lawyers. Thus, the contention of the learned counsel
for the appellant that the High Court should not have decided the appeal on its merits
without the presence of the counsel does not deserve acceptance. That apart, it is
noticeable that after the judgment was dictated in open court, the counsel appeared
and he was allowed to put forth his submissions and the same have been dealt with."
145. In the case reported in Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 12 , the Hon'ble Supreme
Court was dealing with a situation where convict and his counsel was absent and appellant's appeal
was dismissed by the High Court on merits. Hon'ble Supreme Court had taken a comprehensive
view of all the precedents and the law in paras-3, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 24 which are reproduced
herein below:-
"3. It is necessary to distinguish dismissal of appeals in instances where steps have
been taken by the court for securing the presence of the appellant by coercive means,
including the issuance of non-bailable warrants or initiation of proceedings for
declaring the appellant a proclaimed offender by recourse to Part C of Chapter VI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ("CrPC", for short) on the one hand, and those
where the appellant may incidentally and unwittingly be absent when his appeal is
called on for hearing. The malaise which we are perturbed about is the wilful
withdrawal of the convict from the appellate proceedings initiated by him after he has
succeeded in gaining his enlargement on bail or exemption from surrender.
"6. Section 386 CrPC is of importance for the purposes before us. It requires the
appellate court to peruse the records, and hear the appellant or his pleader if he
appears; thereafter it may dismiss the appeal if it considers that there is insufficient
ground for interference. In the case of an appeal from an order of acquittal (State
appeals in curial parlance) it may reverse the order and direct that further inquiry be
carried out or that the accused be retried or committed for trial. Even in the case of
an appeal from an order of acquittal the appellate court is competent to find him
guilty and pass sentence on him according to law. The proviso to this section
prescribes that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an
opportunity of showing cause against such a proposal, thereby mandating that an
accused must be present and must be heard if an order of acquittal is to be upturned
and reversed. It is thus significant, and so we reiterate, that the legislature has cast an
obligation on the appellate court to decide an appeal on its merits only in the case of
death references, regardless of whether or not an appeal has been preferred by the
convict.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
53

"7. Last, but not the least in our appreciation of the law, Section 482 CrPC stands in
solitary splendour. It preserves the inherent power of the High Court. It enunciates
that nothing in CrPC shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the
High Court to make such orders as may be necessary, firstly, to "give effect to any
order under CrPC", words which are not to be found in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (hereafter referred to as "CPC"). Ergo, the High Court can, while exercising
inherent powers in its criminal jurisdiction, take all necessary steps for enforcing
compliance with its orders. For salutary reason Section 482 CrPC makes the criminal
court much more effective and all pervasive than the civil court insofar as ensuring
obedience of its orders is concerned. Secondly, Section 482 clarifies that CrPC does
not circumscribe the actions available to the High Court to prevent abuse of its
process, from the inception of proceedings till their culmination. Judicial process
includes compelling a respondent to appear before it. When the Court encounters a
recalcitrant appellant/convict who shows negligible interest in prosecuting his
appeal, none of the sections in Chapter XXIX CrPC dealing with appeals, precludes or
dissuades it from dismissing the appeals. It seems to us that passing such orders
would eventually make it clear to all that intentional and repeated failure to
prosecute the appeal would inexorably lead not merely to incarceration but more
importantly to the confirmation of the conviction and sentence consequent on the
dismissal of the appeal. Thirdly, none of the provisions of CrPC can possibly limit the
power of the High Court to otherwise secure the ends of justice. While it is not
possible to define the concept of "justice", suffice it to say that it encompasses not just
the rights of the convict, but also of the victims of crime as well as of the law abiding
section of society who look towards the courts as vital instruments for preservation of
peace and the curtailment or containment of crime by punishing those who
transgress the law. If the convicts can circumvent the consequence of their
conviction, peace, tranquillity and harmony in society will be reduced to a chimera.
Section 482 emblazons the difference between preventing the abuse of the jural
process on the one hand and securing of the ends of justice on the other. It appears to
us that Section 482 CrPC has not been given due importance in combating the
rampant malpractice of filing appeals only for scotching sentences imposed by
criminal courts.
"12. Indeed, the Court in Bani Singh case [Bani Singh v. State of U.P., (1996) 4 SCC
720] was not confronted by the wilful abscondence of the appellant concerned. It is
noteworthy that the High Court had not taken steps calculated to secure the presence
of the appellant before it. On the contrary it had palpably adopted the less tedious
course of simply dismissing the appeal. Signally, the Court had observed that in order
to enforce discipline the appeal could be dismissed for non-prosecution. There was
no material to manifest that the appellant had abandoned his appeal or had no
intention to prosecute it. In Bani Singh attention of the Court was not drawn to the
views of a coordinate Bench in Kishan Singh [Kishan Singh v. State of U.P., (1996) 9
SCC 372] decided four years previously on 2-11-1992. Having carefully read through
both the opinions we think it important to clarify that Bani Singh does not cogitate or
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
54

reflect upon the options available to the Court which is faced with a recalcitrant
appellant who is not prosecuting his appeal, in flagrant violation and abuse of the bail
orders granted in his favour. Kishan Singh deals precisely with the options open to
the appellate court at the preliminary hearing of an appeal.
"13. Any discourse on this aspect of the law would be incomplete without
appreciating and assimilating Dharam Pal v. State of U.P.. The contention canvassed
on behalf of the accused was that a miscarriage of justice had occurred since the
appellant had not been served with notice of the appeal by the High Court, which
nevertheless decided the appeal ex parte. Reference was made to Bani Singh, as also
to Chapter XXIX of CrPC in general, and Sections 385 and 386 in particular;
conspicuously Section 482 CrPC was not even mentioned. The learned counsel for
Dharam Pal had expressed his inability to argue the case before the High Court. As in
the case in hand, this Court had perused the impugned judgment of the High Court
and found it to be well-merited and duly predicated on a careful consideration of the
material on record. It was observed that:
"15. ... The position, of course, would have been different if the High Court had simply
dismissed the appeal without going into the merits. ... That being the position, it
cannot be said that the High Court had ignored the basic principles of criminal justice
while disposing of the appeal ex parte."
"14. Dharam Pal [Dharam Pal v. State of U.P., (2008) 17 SCC 337] and for that matter
Bani Singh [Bani Singh v. State of U.P., (1996) 4 SCC 720] or Shyam Deo Pandey
[Shyam Deo Pandey v. State of Bihar, (1971) 1 SCC 855] neither proscribe the
invocation of Section 482 CrPC nor opine that dismissal of an appeal under Section
482, for good reasons which are lucidly spelt out, is improper. It has not hithertofore
even been considered that Section 482 CrPC should be applied in circumstances of
the wilful abscondence of the appellant/convict in contumacious and deliberate
disregard and disobedience of the terms and conditions on which he was enlarged on
bail or exempted from surrender.
"15. The discussion would not be complete without noticing the orders in Parasuram
Patel v. State of Orissa [(1994) 4 SCC 664] and Madan Lal Kapoor v. Rajiv Thapar
[(2007) 7 SCC 623] . In neither of these cases had the appellate court taken steps
available to it to ensure the attendance of the appellant. Instead, it appears that the
High Court concerned had adopted the obviously less tedious approach of dismissing
the appeals only because neither the appellant nor his counsel were present when the
case was called on for hearing. The Court did not ruminate upon the curial
malpractice which has now become endemic viz. the filing of appeals by convicts with
the obvious intent to frustrate and circumvent sentences passed by criminal courts.
"16. We cannot close our eyes to the reality that less than twenty per cent of
prosecutions are successful; the rest are futile largely because of inept, shoddy or
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
55

substandard investigation and prosecution. Even in cases where the prosecution
succeeds in proving the guilt of the accused, punishment is emasculated by convicts
not because of their succeeding in having their conviction overturned and reversed by
the appellate court, but by going underground and disappearing from society after
receiving reprieve from incarceration from the appellate court. We are convinced that
the interests of society at large are being repeatedly sacrificed for the exaggerated, if
not misplaced concern for what is fashionably termed as "human rights" of convicts.
Recent judgments of the Court contain a perceptible dilution of legal principles such
as the right of silence of the accused. The Supreme Court has, in several cases,
departed from this rule in enunciating, inter alia, that the accused are duty-bound to
give a valid explanation of facts within their specific and personal knowledge in order
to dispel doubts on their complicity. Even half a century ago this would have been a
jural anathema. Given the woeful success rate of the prosecution, if even the
relatively niggard number of convicts are permitted to circumvent their sentences,
crime is certain to envelop society. Law is dynamic and not immutable or static. It
constantly adapts itself to critically changing compulsions of society.
"24. It seems to us that it is necessary for the appellate court which is confronted with
the absence of the convict as well as his counsel, to immediately proceed against the
persons who stood surety at the time when the convict was granted bail, as this may
lead to his discovery and production in court. If even this exercise fails to locate and
bring forth the convict, the appellate court is empowered to dismiss the appeal. We
fully and respectfully concur with the recent elucidation of the law, profound yet
perspicuous, in K.S. Panduranga v. State of Karnataka."
146. Thus, apart from what has been highlighted in the case of Bani Singh and others Vs. State of
U.P. 11, it was resolved in Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 12 while concurring with
Bani Singh and others Vs. State of U.P. 11 that on absence of appellant and his counsel on the date of
listing, the court must at once seek the presence of the appellant in court and for this purpose may
proceed against his sureties and when, even after efforts, presence of appellant could not be secured,
the court may dispose the appeal on merits and when the convict is in jail the court may adjourn the
hearing to facilitate the appearance of counsel and in discretion of the court Amicus may also be
appointed.
147. In the case of Christopher Raj Vs. K. Vijayakumar 48, when the appeal against acquittal was
decided by the High Court in absence of respondent-accused, it was highlighted in para-8 as under:-
"8. Admittedly, the appellant-accused did not appear in the criminal appeal before
the High Court. When the accused has not entered appearance in the High Court, in
our view, the High Court should have issued second notice to the appellant-accused
or the High Court Legal Services Committee to appoint an advocate or the High Court
could have taken the assistance of Amicus Curiae. When the accused was not
represented, without appointing any counsel as Amicus Curiae to defend the accused,
the High Court ought not to have decided the criminal appeal on merits; more so,
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
56

when the appellant-accused had the benefit of acquittal. The High Court erred in
reversing the acquittal without affording any opportunity to the appellant-accused or
by appointing an Amicus Curiae to argue the matter on his behalf."
148. In another important case reported in Anokhilal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 7 while
considering the issue of appointment of amicus, when the appellant-convict and his counsel is not
appearing and providing sufficient and reasonable time to him to achieve fair trial, the Apex Court
opined in paras 31 (31.1 to 31.4), which are reproduced herein below:-
"31. Before we part, we must lay down certain norms so that the infirmities that we
have noticed in the present matter are not repeated:
31.1. In all cases where there is a possibility of life sentence or death sentence, learned
advocates who have put in minimum of 10 years' practice at the Bar alone be
considered to be appointed as Amicus Curiae or through legal services to represent
an accused.
"31.2. In all matters dealt with by the High Court concerning confirmation of death
sentence, Senior Advocates of the Court must first be considered to be appointed as
Amicus Curiae.
"31.3. Whenever any learned counsel is appointed as Amicus Curiae, some reasonable
time may be provided to enable the counsel to prepare the matter. There cannot be
any hard-and-fast rule in that behalf. However, a minimum of seven days' time may
normally be considered to be appropriate and adequate.
"31.4. Any learned counsel, who is appointed as Amicus Curiae on behalf of the
accused must normally be granted to have meetings and discussion with the accused
concerned. Such interactions may prove to be helpful as was noticed in Imtiyaz
Ramzan Khan [Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan v. State of Maharashtra, (2018) 9 SCC 160 :
(2018) 3 SCC (Cri) 721] ."
149. Certain observations were made in Anokhi Lal which have again been explained in Criminal
Appeal No.771 of 2024: Ashok Vs. State of U.P., 2024 SCC OnLine 3580.
The Supreme Court while acquitting the accused, Ashok had found that there was a failure on the
part of the State to provide timely legal to the Appellant. They also found the quality of legal aid
given to him to be poor. The Court referred to the observations made by it in Hussainara Khatoon
and then M.H. Hoskote Vs. State of Maharashtra, 1978 (3) SCC 544, where it had been observed in
paragraph-25 that :-
"25. If a prisoner sentenced to imprisonment, is virtually unable to exercise,
constitutional and statutory right of Appeal, inclusive of Special Leave to Appeal, for
want of legal assistance, there is implicit in the Court under Article 142 read with
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
57

Article 21 and 39A of the Constitution, power to assign counsel for such imprisoned
individual for doing complete Justice. This is a necessary incident of the right of
Appeal conferred by the Code and allowed by Article 136 of the Constitution. The
inference is enough that this is a State's duty and not Government charity. Equally
affirmative is the implication that while legal services must be free to the beneficiary,
the lawyer himself has to be reasonably remunerated for his services. Surely, the
profession has a public commitment to the people, but may depend upon
philanthropy of its members. Their services, specially when they are on behalf of the
State must be paid for. Naturally, the State's concern is that the fees must be a
reasonable sum that the Court may fix when assigning counsel to the prisoner. Of
course, the Court may judge the situation and consider from all angles whether it is
necessary for the ends of justice to make available legal aid in the particular case. In
every country while free legal services are given, it is not done in all cases, but only
where public Justice suffers otherwise. That discretion resides in the Court."
Referring to the judgement in Anokhilal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 7 and the observations made
in paragraph 11 and paragraph 20 thereof, it was also observed that the time granted to the Amicus
Curiae in some cases to prepare for the defence was completely insufficient and that the award of
sentence of death resulted in deprivation of life of the accused and was in the breach of the
procedure established by Law referring to the judgement in the case of Bashera Vs. State of U.P.,
1969 (1) SCR 32 and the judgement rendered by Andhra Pradesh High Court in Alla Nageshwar Rao,
AIR 1957 AP 505; it was stated that mere formal compliance of the rule under which sufficient time
had to be given to the counsel to prepare for the defence would not carry out the object underlying
the rule. It was further stated that opportunity must be real where the Counsel is given sufficient
and adequate time to prepare. It was observed that if the trial Court makes substantial progress in
the matter on the very day on which Counsel was engaged as Amicus Curiae, it could not be said that
sufficient opportunity was given to the counsel to prepare the matter.
The Supreme Court in Ashok (supra) referred to paragraph 31 of the judgement rendered in Anokhi
Lal and the observation made therein that in all cases whether there is a possibility of life sentence
or death sentence, learned Advocates who have put in minimum of 10 years practice at the Bar alone
be considered to be appointed as Amicus Curiae, or through Legal Services Authority to represent an
accused and in all matters dealt with by the High Court concerning confirmation of death sentence,
Senior Advocates of the Court must first be considered to be appointed as Amicus Curiae. The
Supreme Court referred to Sections 303 and 304 of the Cr.P.C. and Section 340 and 341 of the
Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita 2023 (for short 'BNSS'), which are corresponding Sections, and it
was observed that it is the duty of the Court to ensure that a legal aid lawyer is appointed to espouse
the cause of the accused.
In paragraph-23 of the judgement rendered in Ashok (supra), the Supreme Court observed as
follows: -
A. It is the duty of the Court to ensure that proper legal aid is provided to an accused;
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
58

B. When an accused is not represented by an Advocate, it is the duty of every public
prosecutor to point out to the Court, the requirement of providing him free legal aid.
The reason is that it is the duty of the public prosecutor to ensure that the trial is
conducted fairly and lawfully;
C. Even if the Court is inclined to frame charges or record examination in chief of the
prosecution witnesses in a case where the accused has not engaged any Advocate, it is
incumbent upon the public prosecutor to request the Court not to proceed without
offering legal aid to the accused;
D. It is the duty of the public prosecutor to assist the trial Court in recording of the
statement of the accused under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. If the Court omits to put
any material circumstance brought on record against the accused, the public
prosecutor must bring it to the notice of the Court while the examination in chief of
the accused is being recorded. He must assist the Court in framing the questions to
be put to the accused. As it is the duty of the public prosecutor to ensure that those
who are guilty of the commission of offence must be punished, it is also his duty to
ensure that there are no infirmities in the conduct of the trial, which will cause
prejudice to the accused;
E. An accused who is not represented by an Advocate is entitled to free legal aid at all
material stages starting from remand every accused has the right to get legal aid even
to file bail petitions;
F. At all material stages, including the stage of framing the charge, recording the
evidence, et cetera, it is the duty of the Court to make the accused aware of his right
to get free legal aid. If the accused expresses that he needs legal aid, the trial Court
must ensure that a legal aid Advocate is appointed to represent accused;
G. As held in the case of Anokhi Lal, in all the cases where there is a possibility of a
life sentence or for death sentence, only those learned Advocates who have put in a
minimum of 10 years of practice on the criminal side should be considered to be
appointed as Amicus Curiae or as a legal aid Advocate. Even in the cases not covered
by the categories mentioned above, the accused is entitled to a legal aid Advocate who
has good knowledge of the law and has an experience of conducting trials on the
criminal side. It would be ideal if the Legal Services Authorities at all levels give
proper training to newly appointed legal aid Advocates not only by conducting
lectures, but also by allowing the newly appointed legal aid Advocates to work with
senior members of the Bar in a requisite No. of trials;
H. The State Legal Services Authority shall issue directions to the legal services
authorities at all levels to monitor the work of the legal aid Advocates and shall
ensure that the legal aid Advocates attend the Court regularly and punctually when
the cases entrusted to them are fixed.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
59

I. It is necessary to ensure that the same legal aid Advocate is continued throughout
the trial, unless there are compelling reasons not to do so, or unless the accused
appoints an Advocate of his choice.
J. In the cases where the offences are of a very serious nature and complicated legal
and factual issues are involved, the Court, instead of appointing an empanelled legal
aid Advocate, may appoint a senior member of the Bar who has a wide experience of
conducting trials to espouse the cause of the accused, so that the accused gets best
possible legal assistance;
K. The right of the accused to defend himself in a criminal trial is guaranteed by
Article 21 of the Constitution of India. He is entitled to a fair trial. But if effective legal
aid is not made available to an accused, who is unable to engage an Advocate, it will
amount to infringement of his fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 21;
L. If legal aid is provided only for the sake of providing it, it will serve no purpose.
Legal aid must be effective. Advocates appointed to espouse the cause of the accused
must have good knowledge of criminal laws, law of evidence and procedural laws,
apart from other important statutes. As there is a constitutional right to legal aid, that
right will be effective only if the legal aid provided is of a good quality. If the legal aid
Advocate provided to an accused is not competent enough to conduct the trial
efficiently, the rights of the accused will be violated."
150. Perusal of the above law reports would evidently reveal that the Question No. 5 formulated by
the Referral Court for consideration by this Bench has already been set at rest by the law laid down
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bani Singh and others Vs. State of U.P. 11, Surya Baksh Singh Vs.
State of Uttar Pradesh 12 and K.S. Panduranga Vs. State of Karnataka 13, however, a distinction has
been drawn by the Apex Court in Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 12 between the
convicts, who are not having any notice of hearing of their appeals, and those who are misusing the
procedure by not appearing and the ratio settled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in these reports may
be summarized as under:-
1. That the High Court cannot dismiss an appeal for non-prosecution simpliciter
without examining the merits;
2. That the Court is not bound to adjourn the matter if both the appellant or his
counsel/lawyer are absent;
3. That the court may, as a matter of prudence or indulgence, adjourn the matter but
it is not bound to do so;
4. That it can dispose of the appeal after perusing the record and judgment of the trial
court;
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
60

5. That if the accused is in jail and cannot, on his own, come to court, it would be
advisable to adjourn the case and fix another date to facilitate the appearance of the
accused-appellant if his lawyer is not present, and if the lawyer is absent and the
court deems it appropriate to appoint a lawyer at the State expense to assist it,
nothing in law would preclude the court from doing so;
6. That if the case is decided on merits in the absence of the appellant, the higher
court can remedy the situation;
7. A distinction, however, is to be made in dismissal of appeals where steps have been
taken by the court for securing the presence of the appellant by issuing coercive
process i.e. issuance of non-bailable warrants etc. on the one hand and those where
the appellant may incidentally and unwittingly remained absent when his appeal was
called on for hearing (para-3 of Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 12; and
8. On absence of appellant or his counsel in appeal against conviction and respondent
and his counsel in appeal against acquittal, the court would seek his presence by
issuing suitable process and may also issue notice to the sureties and if this exercise
fails to locate and bring the appellant to the court, the court can pass judgment with
the assistance of the public prosecutor and in its discretion may also appoint a
counsel on State expense for its assistance (amicus curiae).
151. The crux of the aforesaid observations of the three celebrated judgments rendered by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bani Singh and others Vs. State of U.P. 11, Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of
Uttar Pradesh 12 and K.S. Panduranga Vs. State of Karnataka 13, thus, covers the entire length and
breadth of Question No. 5 formulated by the Division Bench at Lucknow for consideration by this
Bench and no fresh exercise, in our considered opinion, is required to be undertaken by this Bench,
including on one point which has been highlighted by the Division Bench at Lucknow i.e. whether
the amicus curiae may be appointed even when the presence of the convict, appellant or
accused-respondent may be secured and without his consent.
152. The aforesaid legal precedents would evidently canvass that the emphasis of the Apex Court has
been on providing opportunity of being heard to the appellant who is willing to cooperate with the
appellate court or his counsel and in this regard a process to cause his presence for the purpose of
giving opportunity of being heard is required to be issued to him and when the court is satisfied that
such appellant is deliberately avoiding his presence before the court, in such a situation, the court
may dispose of the appeal in the manner approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bani Singh and
others Vs. State of U.P. 11, Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 12 and K.S. Panduranga Vs.
State of Karnataka 13 (i.e. after perusing the record/evidence vis-a-vis judgment of the trial court
with the assistance of prosecutor and Amicus, if appointed) and we do not have any reason to
deviate from the settled proposition laid down by the Apex Court in the above mentioned cases,
moreover, the appointment of amicus is only for the purpose to provide fair trail to the appellant
and also for rendering the assistance to the Court.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
61

153. It is to be reiterated that no ready-made formula or straight-jacket principle of universal
application may be formulated in this regard to fit in every circumstance. Neither the factual matrix
of two criminal cases or of appeals are same nor all the procedural complexities of appeal may be
foreseen in order to cull out a ready made principle of uniform application and the court in a given
situation would have to take a just and fair decision, however, the aforesaid decision of the Supreme
Court would sufficiently indicate that an appellant who is avoiding his presence before the court and
is not cooperating with hearing of the appeal may not be allowed to do-so and if the appellate court
is satisfied that delaying tactics are being adopted by such an accused or appellant/convict, it may
act in accordance with the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above mentioned law
reports and in this situation the appellate court would be justified in deciding the appeal on merits
by perusing the judgment of the trial court and taking into account all the possible arguments which
may be made by the appellant, had his counsel been present before the appellate court, however,
this will not preclude the appellate court to appoint an amicus in terms of the law laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anokhilal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 7.
154. With the observations made hereinbefore, we answer Question No. 5 accordingly.
155. In conclusion of the aforesaid discussions, the questions referred to this Bench are answered as
under:-
Question No.(1) Whether the Chief Judicial Magistrate or any other Magistrate can
enlarge an acquitted person or a person convicted of an offence on bail even in a case
where in an appeal against acquittal or conviction, as the case may be, the High Court
or any other appellate Court has issued non-bailable warrants for securing his
presence without any such stipulation therein for release by the Court below, more so
when such non-bailable warrant has been issued at a subsequent stage of appeal and
not the admission stage?
Question No.(2) Assuming the Magistrate has jurisdiction as referred in Question No.
1, whether a general direction of a mandatory nature can be issued by the High Court
to the Magistrate for such release, as has been done vide order dated 18.01.2024
passed in Government Appeal No. 454 of 2022 and order dated 19.01.2024 passed in
Government Appeal No. 2552 of 1981, does it not deprive the Magistrate of his
discretion in this regard to consider such release on case to case basis in view of the
law discussed?
Question No.(3) Whether the observations and directions as contained in the order
dated 18.01.2024 passed in Government Appeal No. 454 of 2022 (State of U.P. vs.
Geeta Devi and another) and the directions dated 19.01.2024 in Government Appeal
No. 2552 of 1981 (State of U.P. Vs. Shamshuddin Khan and others) are in accordance
with law?
Answer- Where the High Court has consciously issued non-bailable warrant for arrest
of an appellant the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge as the case may be would have
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
62

no jurisdiction to release such person on bail.
It would be the terms of the order of the High Court under which non-bailable
warrants have been issued which will govern the fate of the accused or
appellant/convict and neither C.J.M. nor Session Judge would have jurisdiction to
release such appellant or accused on bail irrespective of the fact whether the
non-bailable warrant has been issued in an appeal against acquittal or in an appeal
against conviction.
In case the appellant or accused is arrested and committed to prison an information
to that effect shall be given to the High Court pertaining to the arrest of such person
by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Session Judge concerned, forthwith.
So far as issuance of bailable warrant is concerned the discretion would always be of
the subordinate court to release such an appellant or accused on bail subject to the
condition that he will appear before the High Court on a particular day highlighted or
indicated by the High Court in its order.
In view of above the observations and directions as contained in the order dated
18.01.2024 passed in Government Appeal No. 454 of 2022 (State of U.P. vs. Geeta
Devi and another) and the directions dated 19.01.2024 in Government Appeal No.
2552 of 1981 (State of U.P. Vs. Shamshuddin Khan and others) cannot be said to be a
correct appreciation of law.
Question No.(4) What are the modes prescribed in law for securing the presence of
acquitted person or one who has been convicted, in an appeal before the High Court
and what should be the course to be ordinarily adopted by the High Court in exercise
of its appellate criminal jurisdiction for securing such presence to facilitate hearing of
such appeals?
Answer- Having regard to the law propounded in Poosu (supra)31 in an appeal
against acquittal in an appropriate case coercive process even of the nature of
bailable warrants or non-bailable warrants may be issued against the accused having
regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case, but it may not be
construed that in all appeals against acquittal while summoning a person warrants
would in variably be issued as in suitable cases, in the discretion of the Court
summons may also be issued.
In an appeal against conviction wherein an appellant has already been released on
bail and his counsel has not appeared for arguing the appeal. Generally, no warrant
of arrest could be straightaway issued against him at the first instance for the reason
that he has already been released on bail by the court and no condition of his
personal presence on each day of hearing was imposed on him. A bailable warrant
may be issued after the office reports that Trial Court Record has been received and
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
63

paper-book has been prepared.
Question No.(5) Whether an appeal, either against acquittal or conviction, can be
heard by appointing an Amicus Curiae for the accused-respondent or the
convicted-appellant, as the case may be, in the event he is not appearing in the
appellate proceedings though his presence can be secured, without his consent and
without any intimation to him, if so, under what circumstances?
Answer- This question is no more res integra and has been set at rest by the Apex
Court in Bani Singh and others Vs. State of U.P. 11, Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of
Uttar Pradesh 12 and K.S. Panduranga Vs. State of Karnataka 13 and in Anokhilal Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh 7 in terms that an appellant who is avoiding his presence
before the court and is not cooperating with hearing of the appeal may not be allowed
to do-so and if the appellate court is satisfied that delaying tactics are being adopted
by such an accused or appellant/convict, it may act in accordance with the law laid
down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above mentioned law reports and in this
situation the appellate court would be justified in deciding the appeal on merits by
perusing the judgment of the trial court and taking into account all the possible
arguments which may be made by the appellant, had his counsel been present before
the appellate court, however, this will not preclude the appellate court to appoint an
amicus in terms of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anokhilal Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh (supra), specially in an appeal wherein the appellant is in
jail.
We do not have any reason to deviate from the settled proposition of law as
propounded by the Apex Court in the above mentioned cases, moreover, the
appointment of amicus is for the purpose to provide fair trial to the appellant and
also for rendering the necessary assistance to the Court, specially in a case where the
convict appellant is in prison.
The Reference is answered accordingly.
156. The Reference stands disposed of.
157. We once again reiterate our appreciation of the dedication with which we have been assisted by
Shri Apoorva Tiwari, Shri Nadeem Murtaza, assisted by S/Shri Wali Nawaz Khan, Harsh Vardhan
Kedia and Ms. Smigdha Singh, Shri S.M. Singh Royekwar, assisted by Shri Sumeet Tahilramani, Sri
Vikas Vikram Singh, Sri Naved Ali, Sri Rajat Gangwar, Sri Alok Mishra, assisted by Shri Ajeet
Kumar Mishra, Sri Ayush Tandon, learned Advocates, as also Dr. V.K. Singh, learned Government
Advocate, Sri Umesh Chandra Verma, learned Additional Government Advocate-I, Shri Pawan
Kumar Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate, Sri Shivendra Shivam Singh Rathore,
learned counsel for the State, Shri Bhavesh Chandel and Shri Shivang Tiwari. Thus we put on record
our appreciation for the able assistance rendered by these Counsel.
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
64

158. Let the record of the above mentioned appeals be placed before appropriate Benches having
jurisdiction in the current determination for further progress of the Appeals.
(Mohd. Faiz Alam Khan,J.) (Pankaj Bhatia, J.) (Mrs. Sangeeta Chandra, J.) Order Date:- 22.01.2025
Rahul/MVS/Muk/Praveen
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rajoo Alias Ramakant Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, 2012 (8) SCC 553 1 Raghuvansh Dewan Chand
Bhasin Vs. State of Maharashtra and others, 2012 (9) SCC 791 2 Inder Mohan Goswami Vs. State of
Uttaranchal, 2007 (12) SCC 1 3 Dhananjay Rai Alias Guddu Rai Vs. State of Bihar 2022 (14) SCC 95
4 K. Muruganandam and others Vs. State, 2021 (20) SCC 642 5 Hussainara Khatoon Vs. Home
Secretary, State of Bihar, Patna, 1981 SC 928 (4) 6 Anokhi Lal Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, 2019
(20) SCC 196 7 Zahira Habibullah Sheikh and another vs. State of Gujarat, 2004 (4) SCC 158 8
Mohammad Hussain Vs. State 2012 (9) SCC 408 9 Niraj Devnarayan Shukla and others Vs. State of
Gujarat, 2015 SCC OnLine Gujarat 6269 10 Bani Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1996 (4) SCC 720
11 Surya Baksh Singh Vs. State of U.P., 2014 (14) SCC 222 12 K.S. Panduranga Vs. State of
Karnataka, 2013 (3) SCC 721 13 Dilip S Dahanukar Vs. Kotak Mahindra Company Limited, 2007 (6)
SCC 528 14 Satyendra Kumar Antil vs C.B.I. 2022 (10) SCC 51 15 Sarah Matthew Vs. Institute of
Cardiovascular Diseases, 2014 (2) SCC 62 16 Dhanna Lal Vs. Kalavati Bai, 2002 (6) SCC 16 17 Dayal
Singh Vs. State of Uttaranchal, 2012 (3) SCC 263 18 Mohammed Firoz Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh,
2022 (7) SCC 443 19 State (NCT of Delhi) Vs. Shiv Kumar Yadav, 2016 (2) SCC 402 20 Somesh
Chaurasia Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, 2022 (19) SCC 480 21 Abdul Basit Vs. Mohammed Abdul
Qadir Chaudhary, 2014 (10) SCC 754 22 Purshottam Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, 2023 SCC OnLine SC
1410 23 Ashish Chaddha Vs. Asha Kumari and another, 2012 (1) SCC 680 24 Madan Mohan Vs.
State of Rajasthan and others, 2018 (12) SCC 30 25 Smt. Maya Dixit Vs. State of U.P., 2010 (83)
ALR 664 26 State of U.P. and others Vs. Anil Kumar Sharma and another, 2015 (6) SCC 716 27
Praneeta Prakash Navage Vs. State of Maharashtra and others, 2012 SCC OnLine Bombay 1085 28
Popular Muthaiah Vs. State represented by Inspector of Police, 2006 (7) SCC 296 29 Sanjay Dubey
Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, 2023 SCC OnLine Supreme Court 610 30 State of U.P. Vs. Poosu and
another, 1976 (3) SCC 1 31 Kabira Vs. State of U.P., 1982 SCC (Criminal) 144 32 Mohammad Sukur
Ali Vs. State of Assam 2011 (4) SCC 729 33 A.S. Mohammed Rafi Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and
others, AIR 2011 SC 308 34 Man Singh and another Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 2008 (9) SCC 542
35 Bapu Limbaji Kamble Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2005 (11) SC 412 36 Balakrishna Mahadev Lad
Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2012 SCC OnLine Bombay 1490 37 State of Punjab Vs. Davinder Pal Singh
Bhullar and others, 2011 (14) SCC 770 38 Laxman Das Vs. Resham Chand Kalia and another, 2018
(3) SCC 187 39 State of Maharashtra Vs. Mahesh Kariman Tirky and others, 2023 (1) SCC (Criminal)
137 40 Laxman Das Chagan Lal Bhatia and others Vs. State by the High Court of Bombay, AIR 1968
Bombay 400 41 Imtiyaz Raza Khan Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2018 (9) SCC 160 42 Khatri and others
Vs. State of Bihar and others, (1981) 1 SCC 627 43 Suk Das Vs. UT of Arunachal Pradesh, (1986) 2
SCC 401 44 Shyam Deo Pandey Vs. State of Bihar, (1971) 1 SCC 855 45 Ram Naresh Yadav Vs. State
of Bihar, AIR 1987 SC 1500 46 Dharam Pal and others Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2008) 17 SCC 337
47 Christopher Raj Vs. K. Vijayakumar, (2019) 7 SCC 398 48
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
65

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
In Re- Procedure To Be Followed In ... vs State Of U.P. on 22 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53272789/
66

================================================================================
END OF EXTRACTED TEXT
================================================================================
